1.    The applicant, who was detained between 26 January and 30 March 1990, complains that this deprivation of liberty was contrary to Article 5 paras. 1, 3 and 4 (Art. 5-1, 5-3, 5-4) of the Convention.

      Article 5 para. 1 (Art. 5-1) of the Convention guarantees the right to liberty and security of person, subject to certain exceptions, such as the lawful detention of a person after conviction by a competent court, within the meaning of sub-paragraph (a) of the provision. Article 5 paras. 3 and 4 (Art. 5-3, 5-4) provide certain guarantees of judicial control of provisional release or detention on remand pending trial.

      The Commission notes that the applicant was detained after having been sentenced by the first instance court to 18 months' imprisonment. He was released after the Court of Appeal reviewed this sentence, reducing it to 15 months' imprisonment, convertible to a fine. The Commission finds that the applicant was deprived of his liberty "after conviction by a competent court" within the meaning of Article 5 para. 1 (a) (Art. 5-1-a) of the Convention.

      The Commission also finds no evidence in the case to suggest an infringement of paragraphs 3 and 4 of Article 5 (Art. 5-3, 5-4): The applicant was not detained on remand prior to his trial and the judicial control of the lawfulness of his subsequent detention after conviction was provided by the first instance court (cf. Eur. Court H.R., De Wilde, Ooms and Versyp judgment of 18 June 1971, Series A no. 12, p. 40, para. 76).

      It follows that this part of the application is manifestly ill- founded and must be rejected in accordance with Article 27 para. 2
(Art. 27-2) of the Convention.

2.    The applicant next complains under Article 6 para. 1 (Art. 6-1) of the Convention of an unfair hearing in the determination of the criminal charges against him, in that , allegedly, insufficient reasons were given by the courts to justify his conviction.

      However, again, the Commission finds no evidence in the case to substantiate this complaint.

      It follows that this part of the application is also manifestly ill-founded within the meaning of Article 27 para. 2 (Art. 27-2) of the Convention.

3.    The applicant further complains of the attitude of some of the judges and of not having received a written copy of the first instance judgment in time for the preparation of his appeal. He alleges that witnesses on his behalf were not duly heard by the courts.

      The applicant invokes Article 6 paras. 1, 2, 3 (b) and (d) (Art. 6-1, 6-2, 6-3-b, 6-3-d) of the Convention, which provides certain guarantees to the defence in a criminal case, and Article 14 (Art. 14), which prohibits discrimination in the securement of Convention rights and freedoms.

      However, the Commission is not required to decide whether the facts alleged by the applicant disclose any appearance of a violation of these provisions. Under the terms of Article 26 (Art. 26) of the Convention, "the Commission may only deal with the matter after all domestic remedies have been exhausted, according to the generally recognised rules of international law".

      For this condition to be fulfilled, it is not sufficient for the applicant merely to have presented his case to the various courts competent to deal with it. The complaint made before the Commission must also have been raised, at least in substance, during the proceedings in question. On this point, the Commission refers to its constant case-law (see, for example, No. 12164/86, Dec. 12.10.88, Agneessens v. Belgium, D.R. 58 p. 63).

      In the present case, the Commission notes that none of these complaints has been raised either formally or even in substance during the proceedings before the Court of Cassation. In addition, the examination of the case has disclosed no circumstance which, according to the generally recognised principles of international law, might have absolved the applicant from raising these complaints during the cassation proceedings.

      It follows that this part of the application must be rejected for non-exhaustion of domestic remedies, in accordance with Article 27 para. 3 (Art. 27-3) of the Convention.

4.    The applicant also complains that his conviction for disrupting public peace, by distributing printed material referring to the Moslem population of Western Thrace as "Turks", amounts to a violation of his freedom of thought, expression and assembly, and is discriminatory. He invokes Articles 9, 10, 11 and 14 (Art. 8, 10, 11, 14) of the Convention, which guarantee these freedoms and prohibit discrimination respectively.

      The Commission notes that the applicant's conviction involved his writings. Consequently, it is essentially the exercise of the applicant's freedom of expression with which there has been an interference.

      The relevant part of Article 10 (Art. 10) of the Convention provides as follows:

      "1.  Everyone has the right to the freedom of expression. This right shall include freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart information and ideas without interference by public authorities and regardless of frontiers ...

      2.   The exercice of these freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime ...".

      The respondent Government considers that the applicant submitted his application out of time on 27 September 1991, which is more than six months after the date on which the final decision regarding the applicant's case was given by the Court of Cassation on 15 February 1991.

      However, the application was lodged with the Commission on 11 July 1991, five months after the cassation decision, and therefore within the six month time-limit provided for by Article 26 (Art. 26) of the Convention.

      The Government next submits, in respect of Article 26 (Art. 26) of the Convention, that the applicant has not exhausted domestic remedies because at no time at first instance, on appeal or in cassation did the applicant raise the issues under the Convention, even in substance.

      In reply the applicant maintains that the breach of which he is complaining consists of a continuing violation, and that therefore he was absolved from the obligation of raising the complaint before the Greek courts.

      The Commission observes that Article 26 (Art. 26) of the Convention "should be applied with some degree of flexibility and without excessive formalism ; it is sufficient that the complaints intended to be made subsequently before the Convention organs should have been raised at least in substance and in compliance with the formal requirements and time-limits laid down in domestic law" (Eur. Court H.R., Castells judgment of 23 April 1992, Series A no. 236, p. 19, para. 27).

      It is true that before the Court of Cassation the applicant did not rely expressly on Article 10 (Art. 10) of the Convention, which is directly applicable under Greek law; nor did he invoke the provisions of Article 14 of the Greek Constitution, which also guarantees the right to freedom of expression. However, while basing his case on the narrower domestic criminal law provision of Article 192 of the Greek Penal Code, the applicant claimed the right to use the words "Turk(s)" or "Turkish" to identify the Moslems of Western Thrace.

      The Commission considers that this indicates an issue falling within the scope of freedom of expression. In claiming a right to use these terms the applicant was formulating a complaint which was linked to the alleged violation of Article 10 (Art. 10) of the Convention. Therefore, "he provided the national courts with the opportunity which is in principle intended to be afforded to Contracting States by Article 26 (Art. 26), namely the opportunity of putting right the violations alleged against them" (Eur. Court H.R., Guzzardi judgment of 6 November 1980, Series A no. 39, p. 27, para. 72).

      Accordingly, the Commission considers that the applicant did invoke before the Greek courts, at least in substance, the complaints relating to Article 10 (Art. 10) of the Convention which he now puts to the Commission. He may therefore be said to have exhausted domestic remedies.

      The Commission concludes that the applicant has complied with the requirements of Article 26 (Art. 26) of the Convention.

      As regards the merits of the complaint, the Government maintains that the interference was prescribed by law, in this case Article 192 of the Penal Code. The Government asserts that the proceedings instituted against the applicant and his ensuing conviction pursued the legitimate aim of protecting public order, within the meaning of Article 10 para. 2 (Art. 10-2) of the Convention.

      The applicant does not dispute the existence of a legal basis for his conviction, but he maintains that the conviction and punishment inflicted upon him were without any legitimate purpose under the Convention and alleges that they constituted a kind of reprisal for his assertion of his Turkish ethnic origin. He also maintains that his conviction and the penal sanctions inflicted upon him were not necessary in a democratic society. He stresses the key role played by freedom of expression in a democratic society. The importance of this freedom is even greater for an elected representative whose mandate is to act as spokesman for the opinions and concerns of his constituents.

      The Commission considers that the applicant's complaints, that his conviction for disrupting public peace amounts to a violation of his rights under the Convention, raise complex issues of fact and law, the determination of which should depend on a full examination of the merits. These complaints cannot therefore be regarded as manifestly ill-founded within the meaning of Article 27 para. 2 (Art. 27-2) of the Convention, and no other ground for declaring this part of the case inadmissible has been established.

5.    Finally, the applicant complains, under Article 3 of Protocol No. 1 (P1-3), that he was prevented from participating in the campaign for the legislative election of April 1990 because of his detention.

      Article 3 of Protocol No. 1 (P1-3) provides for free elections under conditions which will ensure the free expression of the opinion of the people in the choice of the legislature.

      The Commission notes that this matter was not submitted to the competent court, which is the Special Supreme Court, and consequently this part of the application is inadmissible for non-exhaustion of domestic remedies.

      It follows that this part of the application must be rejected in accordance with Article 27 para. 3 (Art. 27-3) of the Convention.

      For these reasons, the Commission, by a majority,

      DECLARES ADMISSIBLE, without prejudging the merits of the case, the applicant's complaint that his conviction for having disrupted public peace amounts to a violation of his rights set forth in the Convention;

      DECLARES INADMISSIBLE the remainder of the application.

