     The applicants complain that the security forces carried out a
life-threatening attack on their town during which their homes and
property were burnt and destroyed. They invoke Article 2 (Art. 2) (the
right to life), Article 3 (Art. 3) (the prohibition on inhuman and
degrading treatment), Article 5 (Art. 5) (the right to liberty and
security of person),  Article 6 (Art. 6) (the right of access to
court), Article 8 (Art. 8) (the right to respect for family life and
the home), Article 13 (Art. 13) (the right to effective national
remedies for Convention breaches), Article 14 (Art. 14) (prohibition
on discrimination) and Article 18 (Art. 18) (the prohibition on using
authorised Convention restrictions for ulterior purposes) of the
Convention, as well as Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 (P1-1) to the
Convention (the right to property).

     Exhaustion of domestic remedies

     The Government argue that the application is inadmissible since
the applicants have failed to exhaust domestic remedies as required by
Article 26 (Art. 26) of the Convention.

     In respect of damage alleged to have been caused by the State or
its agents, the Government submit that the applicants had the
possibility of introducing an action for compensation before the civil
or administrative courts relying, inter alia, on Article 125 of the
Turkish Constitution or Article 8 of Decree 430 of 16 December 1990.

     The Government also submit that alleged arson, destruction of
property and threatening conduct are prohibited by the Criminal Code,
in respect of which complaints could be lodged with the competent
authorities, civil or military.

     The applicants maintain that there is no requirement that they
pursue domestic remedies. Any purported remedy is illusory, inadequate
and ineffective since, inter alia, the operation in question in this
case was officially organised, planned and executed by agents of the
State and having regard, inter alia, to the situation in South-East
Turkey which is such that potential applicants have a well-founded fear
of the consequences if they should pursue remedies. In this context the
applicants also allege a lack of genuine investigations by public
prosecutors and other competent authorities; the absence of any cases
showing the payment of adequate compensation to villagers for the
destruction of their homes and villages, or for their expulsion; an
official attitude of legal unaccountability towards the security forces
and the lack of any prosecutions against members of the security forces
for the alleged offences connected with the destruction of villages and
forcible expulsions. There is, in the applicants' view, an
administrative practice of ineffective remedies.

     The Commission recalls that Article 26 (Art. 26) of the
Convention only requires the exhaustion of such remedies which relate
to the breaches of the Convention alleged and at the same time can
provide effective and sufficient redress.  An applicant does not need
to exercise remedies which, although theoretically of a nature to
constitute remedies, do not in reality offer any chance of redressing
the alleged breach. It is furthermore established that the burden of
proving the existence of available and sufficient domestic remedies
lies upon the State invoking the rule (cf. Eur. Court H.R., De Jong,
Baljet and Van den Brink judgment of 22 May 1984, Series A no. 77, p.
18, para. 36, and Nos. 14116/88 and 14117/88, Sargin and Yagci v.
Turkey, Dec. 11.05.89, D.R. 61 p. 250, 262).

     The Commission does not deem it necessary to determine whether
there exists an administrative practice on the part of Turkish
authorities tolerating abuses of human rights of the kind alleged by
the applicants, because it agrees with the applicants that it has not
been established that they had at their disposal adequate remedies
under the state of emergency to deal effectively with their complaints.

     As regards the allegations with regard to the destruction of the
applicants' homes and property, the Commission refers to its findings
in Application No. 21893/93, Akdivar and others v. Turkey (Dec.
19.10.94) which concerned similar complaints of the destruction of
homes and forcible expulsion. In that case, the Commission noted that
it was a known fact that there had been destruction of villages in
South-East Turkey with many people displaced as a result. While the
Government had outlined a general scheme of remedies that would
normally be available for complaints against the security forces, the
Commission found it significant that, although the destruction of
houses and property has been a frequent occurrence in South-East
Turkey, the Government had not provided a single example of
compensation being awarded to villagers for damage like that suffered
by the applicants. Nor had relevant examples been given of successful
prosecutions against members of the security forces for the destruction
of villages and the expulsion of villagers.

     The Commission considered that it seemed unlikely that such
prosecutions could follow from acts committed pursuant to the orders
of the Regional Governor under the state of emergency to effect the
permanent or temporary evacuation of villages, to impose residence
prohibitions or to enforce the transfer of people to other areas. It
further had regard to the vulnerability of dispossessed applicants,
under pressure from both the security forces and the terrorist
activities of the PKK, and held that it could not be said at this stage
that their fear of reprisal if they complained about acts of the
security forces was wholly without foundation.

     The Commission concluded that, in the absence of clear examples
that the remedies put forward by the Government would be effective in
the circumstances of the case, the applicants were absolved from the
obligation to pursue them.

     In the present case, the Government have not provided any
additional information which might lead the Commission to depart from
the above conclusions in respect of remedies available for the
destruction of homes and property in villages and towns.

     The Commission concludes that this application cannot be rejected
for non-exhaustion of domestic remedies under Articles 26 and 27 para.
3 (Art. 26, 27-3) of the Convention.

     As regards the merits

     The Government submit that security forces were in operation in
Lice on 22 October 1993 in response to an attack on the town by the PKK
who were using heavy weapons and artillery. No deliberate damage was
inflicted on the houses in the town by the soldiers.

     The applicants maintain their account of events that the attack
on the town was planned and carried out by the security forces alone,
and that the PKK were not involved.

     The Commission considers, in the light of the parties'
submissions, that the case raises complex issues of law and fact under
the Convention, the determination of which should depend on an
examination of the merits of the application as a whole. The Commission
concludes, therefore, that the application is not manifestly ill-
founded, within the meaning of Article 27 para. 2 (Art. 27-2) of the
Convention. No other grounds for declaring it inadmissible have been
established.

     For these reasons, the Commission, unanimously,

     DECLARES THE APPLICATION ADMISSIBLE, without prejudging the
     merits of the case.