1.    The applicant alleges a violation of Article 5 para. 1 (Art. 5-1) of the Convention in that his detention was neither "in accordance with a procedure prescribed by law", nor "lawful" in domestic law, within the meaning of Article 5 para. 1 (a) or (b)(Art. 5-1-a, 5-1-b), and that none of the other sub-paragraphs applies.

      Article 5 para. 1 (Art. 5-1) of the Convention provides, so far as relevant, as follows:

      "1. Everyone has the right to liberty and security of person. No
      one shall be deprived of his liberty save in the following cases
      and in accordance with a procedure prescribed by law:

      (a)  the lawful detention of a person convicted by a competent
      court;

      (b)  the lawful arrest or detention of a person for non-
      compliance with the lawful order of a court or in order to secure
      the fulfilment of any obligation prescribed by law;..."

      The applicant notes that in its judgment in the present case the Divisional Court answered the Magistrates' questions, "Whether before issuing the ... warrant, (they) conducted an adequate inquiry into the appellant's means", and "Whether the following finding of fact can be supported by the evidence before the Magistrates' Court, namely that the applicant's failure to pay which led to the liability order being made was due to his culpable neglect", in the negative. He submits that the present case cannot be distinguished from the R. v. Manchester City Magistrates' Court ex parte Davies case, and that the detention was unlawful both in domestic and in Convention terms.

      The Government submit that the Magistrates made an error of law within their jurisdiction which has been corrected on appeal. They rely on the absence of any suggestion in the High Court's judgment that the applicant's detention was unlawful.

      The Commission has taken cognizance of the parties' submissions. After a preliminary examination of the complaints under Article 5 para. 1 (a) and (b) (Art. 5-1-a, 5-1-b) of the Convention, the Commission finds that they raise complex issues of fact and law which must be examined on the merits. This part of the application cannot therefore be rejected as being manifestly ill-founded within the meaning of
Article 27 para. 2 (Art. 27-2) of the Convention. No other grounds for inadmissibility have been established.

2.    The applicant also complains under Article 5 para. 5 (Art. 5-5) of the Convention that he had no right to compensation under domestic law for his allegedly unlawful detention.

      Article 5 para. 5 (Art. 5-5) provides as follows:

      "Everyone who has been the victim of arrest or detention in
      contravention of the provisions of this Article shall have an
      enforceable right to compensation."

      The applicant submits that the effect of Section 108 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1991 is to deprive him of the remedy to which he had previously been entitled. The Government submit that the question does not arise as there is no violation of any provision of Article 5 (Art. 5) of the Convention.

      The Commission recalls that under Article 5 para. 5 (Art. 5-5) of the Convention the right to compensation is conditional on a breach of one of the paragraphs of Article 5 (Art. 5). The Commission has declared admissible the applicant's complaints under Article 5 para. 1 (Art. 5-1) of the Convention. It finds that the question whether the applicant's right under Article 5 para. 5 (Art. 5-5) of the Convention was violated also raises complex issues of fact and law, which require further examination on the merits.

      This part of the application can therefore also not be rejected as being manifestly ill-founded within the meaning of Article 27 para. 2 (Art. 27-2) of the Convention. No other grounds for inadmissibility have been established.

3.    Finally, the applicant complains that legal aid was not available to him in the Magistrates' Court.  He alleges a violation of Article 6 (Art. 6) of the Convention.

      Article 6 (Art. 6) of the Convention provides, so far as relevant, as follows:

      "1.  In the determination of his civil rights and obligations or
      of any criminal charge against him, everyone is entitled to a
      fair and public hearing within a reasonable time by an
      independent and impartial tribunal established by law...

      3.  Everyone charged with a criminal offence has the following
      minimum rights:

      (c)   to defend himself in person or through legal assistance of
      his own choosing or, if he has not sufficient means to pay for
      legal assistance, to be given it free when the interests of
      justice so require."

      The applicant submits that, although domestic law categorises the proceedings at issue in the present case as civil, both the nature of the proceedings and the actual penalty imposed indicate that a criminal charge was in fact determined. He considers that, whatever the nature of the proceedings, they were so complex as to require proper legal representation, especially regarding the alternatives to immediate imprisonment. He submits that there was no adequate provision for representation before the Magistrates.

      The Government submit that the proceedings were not criminal.
They further consider that the committal proceedings themselves did not determine the applicant's civil rights and obligations, but were merely execution of the civil judgment brought about by the liability order in the case.  They submit that the combined effect of assistance under the Green Form scheme and ABWOR complies with the requirements of Article 6 (Art. 6) of the Convention, even if this Convention provision applies to the proceedings.

      The Commission finds that this complaint also raises complex issues of fact and law which must be examined on the merits. This part of the application cannot therefore be rejected as being manifestly ill-founded within the meaning of Article 27 para. 2 (Art. 27-2) of the Convention either. No other grounds for inadmissibility have been established.

      For these reasons, the Commission, by a majority

      DECLARES THE APPLICATION ADMISSIBLE, without prejudging the
      merits.