      The applicant complains that she is prevented from living with her family in caravans on her land and from pursuing her traditional way of life as a gypsy. She invokes Article 8 (Art. 8) of the Convention which provides:

      "1.  Everyone has the right to respect for his private and
      family life, his home and his correspondence.

      2.   There shall be no interference by a public authority with
      the exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with
      the law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests
      of national security, public safety or the economic well-being
      of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
      protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the
      rights and freedoms of others."

      Insofar as the applicant complains of the alleged shortfall of official sites for gypsies in the Willingham area, the Government submit that the applicant has not exhausted domestic remedies as required by Article 26 (Art. 26) of the Convention since she has not applied to the Secretary of State to exercise his power under section 9 of the Caravan Sites Act 1968 to direct a local authority to comply with its statutory duty to provide such sites and if necessary, to enforce such directions in the courts.

      The applicant submits there are no effective remedies which she is obliged to exhaust. The Secretary of State's power under section 9 is, she contends, discretionary and rarely exercised.

      The Commission recalls that Article 26 (Art. 26) of the Convention only requires the exhaustion of such remedies which relate to the breaches of the Convention alleged and at the same time can provide effective and sufficient redress.  An applicant does not need to exercise remedies which, although theoretically of a nature to constitute remedies, do not in reality offer any chance of redressing the alleged breach (cf. No. 9248/81, Dec. 10.10.83, D.R. 34 p. 78).

      It is furthermore established that the burden of proving the existence of available and sufficient domestic remedies lies upon the State invoking the rule (cf. Eur. Court. H.R., Deweer judgment of 27 February 1980, Series A no. 35, p. 15, para. 26, and No. 9013/80, Dec. 11.12.82, D.R. 30 p. 96, at p. 102).

      The Commission notes that in the context of the section 9 powers the Secretary of State has a very wide discretion. It appears that he has only exercised his discretion under section 9 in five cases and that there is no example of any enforcement of those directions being pursued in the courts. The Commission recalls that in the case of
Temple v. the United Kingdom (No. 10530/83, Dec. 16.5.85, D.R. 42 p. 171) the Commission held that recourse to a purely discretionary power on the part of the Secretary of State did not constitute an effective domestic remedy.  The Commission finds that the suggested application for discretionary relief in the instant case cannot do so either.  In these circumstances, the Commission finds that the application cannot be declared inadmissible for non-exhaustion of domestic remedies.

      The Government contend that the applicant cannot be considered a victim of any violation of her rights under Article 8 paragraph 1 (Art. 8-1) since as a matter of fact she was and is able to live either on the neighbouring land lawfully occupied by her sister or to apply for a place on one of the many other local authority and private gipsy caravan sites throughout Cambridgeshire. She also has not been subject to any of the criminal sanctions which may applied under the designation system. Further, they point out that applicant took up residence on her land without prior planning permission. They consider that the applicant cannot claim as a member of a minority group to be immune from general planning control.

      To the extent that there might have been any interference with her rights under Article 8 para. 1 (Art. 8-1), the Government consider that the refusal of planning permission and issue of the enforcement notices are justified by the interests of public safety on the road, the economic well-being of the country and the protection of the environment. As for the framework of regulation, including the designation system, this is stated to represent a proportionate response to the need to protect public safety on the roads as well as the rights of others.

      The applicant complains of a violation of her right to respect for her family life, private life and home under Article 8 (Art. 8) of the Convention. She complains that she is prohibited from living on her own land where her children can grow up in a stable environment and receive a continuous education and that she is also prevented from pursuing the traditional lifestyle of a gypsy. She submits that there is an acknowledged shortfall of sites for gypsies in South Cambridgeshire and that local authorities are failing to fulfil their statutory duty to provide sites.

      The applicant also contends that it is a practical impossibility for her to station her caravans on her sister's site and that even if there were vacant pitches on the nearby official site, it is overcrowded and has a reputation for violence which renders it an unsafe location for a single woman living alone with her children.
Further, the designation system which discriminates against gypsies prevents her moving onto unoccupied land or stationing her caravans near the highway. As a result, the applicant contends that she has nowhere she can legally or safely go.

      The Commission has taken cognizance of the submissions of the parties. It considers that the applicant's complaints raise serious issues of fact and law under the Convention, the determination of which should depend on an examination of the merits. It follows that the application cannot be dismissed as manifestly ill-founded. No other ground for declaring it inadmissible has been established.

      For these reasons, the Commission by a majority

      DECLARES THE APPLICATION ADMISSIBLE, without prejudging the merits.