1.    The applicant complains that he has been convicted in respect of conduct which at the relevant time did not constitute a criminal offence. He invokes Article 7 (Art. 7) of the Convention, which provides as follows:

      "1.  No one shall be held guilty of any criminal offence on account of any act or omission which did not constitute a criminal offence under national or international law at the time when it was committed.  Nor shall a heavier penalty be imposed than the one that was applicable at the time the criminal offence was committed.

      2.   This Article (Art. 7) shall not prejudice the trial and punishment of any person for any act or omission which, at the time when it was committed, was criminal according to the general principles of law recognised by civilised nations."

      The Government submit that the applicant's conviction for the attempted rape of his wife was in conformity with Article 7 (Art. 7) of the Convention. By the relevant time, Hale's proposition that a wife's consent to sexual intercourse was irrevocable was no longer good law. English law did not therefore recognise any absolute immunity conferred on a husband who had sexual intercourse with a wife without her consent. There was case-law indicating that a husband could be guilty of raping his wife where a court had issued a decree nisi of divorce or a non-molestation order; where the husband had given an undertaking in lieu of an injunction not to molest his wife; where there was an agreement express or implied between the parties which made it clear that the implied consent of the wife was revoked; and where there had been a withdrawal of either party from cohabitation accompanied by a clear indication that consent to sexual intercourse had been terminated.

      The Government contend that in the present case the facts indicated that the applicant's wife had revoked her consent by mutual agreement with the applicant. Even if the decisions of the courts were based rather on the fact that a wife was able unilaterally to withdraw her consent, this was a reasonable interpretation of the existing law in the light of changing social circumstances and clarified the existing elements of the offence.

      The applicant submits that his conviction for the attempted rape of his wife concerned conduct which did not at the relevant time constitute a criminal offence under United Kingdom law. The general rule that a husband could not commit the offence of rape against his wife was universally accepted until 1990. While exceptions to this principle had developed, these were strictly limited to circumstances where, for example, there had been a court order or formal separation agreement.  The facts of this case do not disclose any mutual agreement between the applicant and his wife. There was no authority for the proposition that a wife could unilaterally withdraw her consent.
Furthermore, in the applicant's case, the Court of Appeal and the House of Lords acknowledged that they were changing the law, not merely clarifying it. The courts went beyond reasonable interpretation of the existing law and extended the definition of the offence in such a way as to include facts which hitherto had not constituted a criminal offence.

      The Commission has taken cognizance of the submissions of the parties. It considers that the applicant's complaint raises serious issues of fact and law under the Convention, the determination of which should depend on an examination of the merits. It follows that this part of the application cannot be dismissed as manifestly ill-founded within the meaning of Article 27 para. 2 (Art. 27-2) of the Convention. No other ground for declaring it inadmissible has been established.

2.    The applicant also complains that he did not receive a fair hearing in respect of the determination of his conjugal rights. He relies on Article 6 para. 1 (Art. 6-1) of the Convention. He claims that he was at no time afforded a proper determination of his civil rights and obligations with particular reference to the conjugal rights of both parties to a marriage and, moreover, that he was denied a fair trial of the charge against him by reason of the failure of the courts to observe, and give proper effect to, the statutory definition of rape (as `unlawful sexual intercourse') in section 1 (1) of the Sexual
Offences (Amendment) Act 1976."

      The Government's observations were not solicited on this point.

      Article 6 para. 1 (Art. 6-1) of the Convention provides in its first sentence as follows:

      "1.  In the determination of his civil rights and obligations or of any criminal charge against him, everyone is entitled to a fair and public hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial tribunal established by law..."

a.    As regards the applicant's complaints concerning conjugal rights, the Commission finds no indication that on the facts of the present case the applicant enjoyed any "civil right" with respect to the enjoyment of conjugal rights in the absence of the consent of his wife.
This aspect of the case must therefore be rejected as being incompatible ratione materiae with the provisions of the Convention, pursuant to Article 27 para. 2 (Art. 27-2) of the Convention.

b.    As regards the applicant's complaints concerning the decisions of the courts in the criminal proceedings, the Commission recalls that, in accordance with Article 19 (Art. 19) of the Convention, its only task is to ensure the observance of the obligations undertaken by the
Parties in the Convention.  In particular, it is not competent to deal with an application alleging that errors of law or fact have been committed by domestic courts, except where it considers that such errors might have involved a possible violation of any of the rights and freedoms set out in the Convention.  The Commission refers, on this point, to its constant case-law (see eg. No. 458/59, X v. Belgium, Dec.
29.3.60, Yearbook 3 pp.222, 236; No. 5258/71, X v. Sweden, Dec. 8.2.73,
Collection 43 pp.71, 77; No. 7987/77, X v. Austria, Dec. 13.12.79, D.R.
18 pp. 31, 45).

      The Commission recalls that the applicant complains that the courts erred in their construction of the 1976 Sexual Offences (Amendment) Act. It is not for the Commission to re-assess these factual elements of the case before the domestic courts. Insofar as it is alleged that as a result the applicant was wrongly convicted of an offence which did not exist at the relevant time it raises no separate issue under Article 6 (Art. 6) of the Convention.

      It follows that this part of the case is manifestly ill-founded within the meaning of Article 27 para. 2 (Art. 27-2) of the Convention.

      For these reasons, the Commission by a majority

      DECLARES ADMISSIBLE the complaint under Article 7 of the
      Convention, without prejudging the merits;

      DECLARES INADMISSIBLE the remainder of the application.