I.  THE COURT’S ASSESSMENT OF THE EVIDENCE AND ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FACTS
A.  Arguments of the parties
1.  The applicant
40.  The applicant alleged that towards the end of 1993, gendarmes had raided his village and that his home and possessions had been destroyed. He requested the Court to find that the destruction of his property and the failure to carry out an effective investigation by the authorities engaged the responsibility of the respondent State under Articles 3, 5, 6, 8, 13, 14 and 18 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 and that each of these Articles had been violated.
2.  The Government
41.  The Government submitted that there was no evidence on which to conclude that security forces had burned the applicant’s house. With reference to the statements given by the applicant’s fellow villagers, and to the gendarmerie reports, the Government maintained that the gendarmes had not conducted an operation in the Akdoruk village on 11 November 1993 and that the security forces could therefore not be held responsible for the burning of the applicant’s house.
B.  General Principles
42.  The Court recalls that, in assessing evidence, it adopts the standard of proof “beyond reasonable doubt” (see Orhan v. Turkey, no. 25656/94, § 264, 18 June 2002). Such proof may follow from the coexistence of sufficiently strong, clear and concordant inferences or of similar unrebutted presumptions of fact. The Court is sensitive to the subsidiary nature of its role and must be cautious in taking on the role of a first-instance tribunal of fact, where this is not rendered unavoidable by the circumstances of a particular case (see, for example, the McKerr v. the United Kingdom decision, no. 28883/95, 4 April 2000). Where domestic proceedings have taken place, it is not the Court’s task to substitute its own assessment of the facts for that of the domestic authorities and, as a general rule, it is for those authorities to assess the evidence before them (see Klaas v. Germany, judgment of 22 September 1993, Series A no. 269, p. 17, § 29). Though the Court is not bound by the latter’s findings, in normal circumstances it requires cogent elements to lead it to depart from the findings of fact they have reached (ibid., p. 18, § 30). In this context, the conduct of the parties when evidence is being obtained has to be taken into account (see Ireland v. the United Kingdom, judgment of 18 January 1978, Series A no. 25, p. 65, § 161).
C.  The Court’s evaluation of facts
1.  The Court’s assessment of the parties’ submissions and of the evidence
43.  The Court observes that the applicant’s oral testimony (see paragraphs 23-26 above) broadly reiterated the written statements he had given both to the national authorities and the Convention institutions. The applicant’s version of the facts was further supported in important details by the eye-witnesses of the burning of his property. The evidence of the key eye-witnesses, Hediye Altun, Vesile Ayman, Mustafa Aldemir, Süleyman Tutuş and Abbas Eren provided plausible details about how the applicant’s house and belongings were burned down by the soldiers. These witnesses gave detailed information about how the soldiers had arrived in the village and how they had set alight the houses. Three of the witnesses submitted that the soldiers had a list of names in their hands, and had burned down the houses of those people whose names had been indicated in the list.
44.  The Court further observes that the Government witnesses were evasive in their oral testimonies. They all steadfastly refused any suggestion that the security forces would engage in village burning (see paragraphs 33, 34, 35 above). Basing themselves on the absence of any logged reference to a military operation, they all denied that any military operation had been conducted in the village or in its vicinity. The Court is also struck by the testimony of the mayor of Akdoruk village, Mehmet Yeşil, who gave the impression of minimising what he had seen or known (see paragraph 30 above). Although he admitted that a large number of soldiers had arrived in the Akdoruk village early in the morning of the incident and that there had been a clash in the vicinity of the village, he rejected the possibility that the soldiers could have burned down the houses.
45.  The Court therefore concludes that the Government witnesses were not sufficiently persuasive to rebut the direct eye-witness testimonies of the applicant’s witnesses and that there is a strong basis in fact to establish that a military operation was conducted in Akdoruk village on 13 November 1993 and that the applicant’s property and possessions were burned down by the security forces.
2.  The Court’s findings of facts and conclusion
46.  In view of the testimonies of the witnesses heard by the delegates (see paragraphs 22-38 above) and the documentary evidence submitted to it by the parties (see paragraph 21 above), the Court’s conclusion of facts can be summarised as follows.
47.  On 13 November 1993, early in the morning a large number of soldiers arrived in the village of Akdoruk. The soldiers had a list of names in their hands and started to set fire to some of the houses. The applicant was not in the village at the time of the incident. He had gone to the fields to work. From where he was standing, the applicant saw the smoke and flames rising from the village. The applicant’s house, belongings and livestock were destroyed during the incident.
48.  On the basis of these findings, the Court will proceed to examine the applicant’s complaints under the various Articles of the Convention.
II.  ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 3 OF THE CONVENTION
49.  The applicant, referring to the circumstances of the destruction of his home and eviction of his family from their village, maintained that there had been a breach of Article 3 of the Convention, which reads:
“No one shall be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.”
50.  The Government rejected this complaint as being without any basis.
51.  The Court reiterates that Article 3 of the Convention enshrines one of the fundamental values of a democratic society. Even in the most difficult of circumstances, such as the fight against organised terrorism and crime, the Convention prohibits in absolute terms treatment contrary to this provision. Ill-treatment must attain a minimum level of severity if it is to fall within the scope of Article 3. The assessment of this minimum is relative: it depends on all the circumstances of the case, such as the duration of the treatment, its physical and/or mental effects and, in some cases, the sex, age and state of health of the victim (see Selçuk and Asker v. Turkey, judgment of 24 April 1998, Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1998-II, p. 909, §§ 75-76).
52.  The Court notes that the applicant’s home was burned down before the eyes of members of his family, depriving them of shelter and support and obliging them to leave their home and friends.
53.  The Court considers that the destruction of the applicant’s home and possessions in the above circumstances must have caused him suffering of sufficient severity for the acts of the security forces to be categorised as inhuman treatment within the meaning of Article 3 (see Selçuk and Asker, cited above, p. 910, §§ 77-78).
54.  The Court therefore concludes that there has been a violation of Article 3 of the Convention.
III.  ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 5 OF THE CONVENTION
55.  The applicant alleged that he was compelled to abandon his home and village in breach of the right to exercise of liberty and enjoyment of security of person.
56.  The Government did not address this aspect of the case.
57.  The Court recalls that the primary concern of Article 5 § 1 of the Convention is protection from an arbitrary deprivation of liberty. The notion of security of person has not been given an independent interpretation (see in this respect Selçuk and Asker v. Turkey, nos. 23184/94 and 23185/94, Commission’s report of 28 November 1996, §§ 185-187).
58.  In the present case, the applicant was never arrested or detained, or otherwise deprived of his liberty. The Court notes that the applicant’s insecure personal circumstances arising from the loss of his home does not fall within the notion of security of person as envisaged by Article 5 § 1 of the Convention (see the Selçuk and Asker v. Turkey, Commission’s report, cited above, § 186).
59.  In the light of the foregoing, the Court concludes that there has been no violation of Article 5 § 1 of the Convention.
IV.  ALLEGED VIOLATIONS OF ARTICLE 8 AND ARTICLE 1 OF PROTOCOL No. 1
60.  The applicant complained of the deliberate destruction of his home and property. He relied on Article 8 of the Convention, which reads:
“1. Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home and his correspondence.
2. There shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.”
and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1, which provides:
“Every natural or legal person is entitled to the peaceful enjoyment of his possessions. No one shall be deprived of his possessions except in the public interest and subject to the conditions provided for by law and by the general principles of international law.
The preceding provisions shall not, however, in any way impair the right of a State to enforce such laws as it deems necessary to control the use of property in accordance with the general interest or to secure the payment of taxes or other contributions or penalties.”
61.  The Government denied the factual basis of the applicant’s complaints and averred that his allegations were unsubstantiated.
62.  The Court has found it established that the security forces deliberately destroyed the applicant’s house and property, obliging his family to leave their village (see paragraph 47 above). There is no doubt that these acts, in addition to giving rise to a violation of Article 3, constituted a grave and unjustified interference with the applicant’s rights to respect for his private and family life and home, and to the peaceful enjoyment of his possessions (see Menteş and Others v. Turkey, judgment of 28 November 1997, Reports 1997-VIII, p. 2711, § 73, and Dulaş v. Turkey, no. 25801/94, § 60, 30 January 2001).
63.  The Court therefore concludes that there has been a violation of Article 8 of the Convention and of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1.
V.  ALLEGED VIOLATIONS OF ARTICLES 6 AND 13 OF THE CONVENTION
A.  Article 6 § 1 of the Convention
64.  The applicant submitted that his right to access to court to assert his civil rights had been denied on account of the failure of the authorities to conduct an effective investigation into his allegations. In his opinion, without such an investigation he had no chance of succeeding in obtaining compensation in civil proceedings.
65.  The Government maintained that the applicant had failed to pursue the remedies available in domestic law. Had the applicant filed a civil action, he would have enjoyed effective access to a court.
66.  The Court notes that the applicant did not bring an action before the civil courts for the reasons given in the admissibility decision of 11 September 1995. It is therefore impossible to determine whether the national courts would have been able to adjudicate on the applicant’s claims had he initiated proceedings. In the Court’s view, however, the applicant’s complaints mainly pertain to the lack of an effective investigation into the deliberate destruction of his family home and possessions by the security forces. It will therefore examine this complaint from the standpoint of Article 13, which imposes a more general obligation on States to provide an effective remedy in respect of alleged violations of the Convention (see Selçuk and Asker, cited above, p. 912, § 92).
67.  The Court therefore finds it unnecessary to determine whether there has been a violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
B.  Article 13 of the Convention
68.  The applicant submitted that he had no effective remedy available in respect of his Convention grievances. With reference to previous cases concerning the destruction of villages, the applicant asserted that there was an administrative practice of violating Article 13 of the Convention in south-east Turkey and that he was a victim of that practice.
69.  The Government argued that the applicant had deliberately ceased to pursue remedies in domestic law. In this connection, they pointed out that after filing a criminal complaint with the public prosecutor’s office in Kulp, the applicant had disappeared without leaving any address with the judicial authorities. Despite this omission, the judicial authorities had carried out an effective investigation into the applicant’s allegations by taking statements from his fellow villagers.
70.  The Court reiterates that Article 13 of the Convention guarantees the availability at national level of a remedy to enforce the substance of the Convention rights and freedoms in whatever form they might happen to be secured in the domestic legal order. The effect of Article 13 is thus to require the provision of a domestic remedy to deal with the substance of an “arguable complaint” under the Convention and to grant appropriate relief, although Contracting States are afforded some discretion as to the manner in which they conform to their Convention obligations under this provision. The scope of the obligation under Article 13 varies depending on the nature of the applicant’s complaint under the Convention. Nevertheless, the remedy required by Article 13 must be “effective” in practice as well as in law, in particular in the sense that its exercise must not be unjustifiably hindered by the acts or omissions of the authorities of the respondent State (see Dulaş, cited above, § 65 and Yöyler, cited above, 87).
71.  Where an individual has an arguable claim that his or her home and possessions have been purposely destroyed by agents of the State, Article 13 requires, in addition to the payment of compensation where appropriate, a thorough and effective investigation capable of leading to the identification and punishment of those responsible and including effective access for the complainant to the investigation procedure (see Menteş and Others, cited above, pp. 2715-16, § 89).
72.  The Court reiterates that it has already found that the applicant’s home and possessions were destroyed in violation of Articles 3 and 8 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1. The applicant’s complaints in this regard are therefore “arguable” for the purposes of Article 13 (see Boyle and Rice v. the United Kingdom, judgment of 27 April 1988, Series A no. 131, p. 23, § 52, and Dulaş, cited above, § 67).
73.  The Court observes that following the burning of their houses and belongings, the applicant, Ahmet Altun and Mustafa Aldemir lodged a complaint with the Kulp public prosecutor. In their statements, the applicant and his two fellow villagers clearly indicated that their houses had been burned down by security forces. Upon receipt of these complaints, the Kulp public prosecutor initiated a preliminary investigation into the applicant’s claims. Given the seriousness of the allegations, the Court is of the opinion that the public prosecutor was under an obligation to gather and record evidence which would help to shed light on the facts of the incident. However, it is noted that the public prosecutor’s investigation was limited to taking statements from the three complainants. It does not appear that any attempt was made to carry out an on-site inspection at the scene of the incident, to establish the true version of the facts through questioning other villagers who might have witnessed the events or to interview the members of security forces who were allegedly involved in the incident. It therefore considers that these elements disclose considerable defects in the reliability and thoroughness of this part of the investigation.
74.  According to the case-file before the Court, after taking statements from the three complainants, the Kulp public prosecutor declared that he had no jurisdiction and transferred the file to the Kulp Administrative Council pursuant to the Law on the prosecution of civil servants. In respect of this second part of the domestic investigation, the Court considers that the authorities who were responsible for the investigation lacked the requisite independence and impartiality. In this context, it is recalled that the Kulp District Governor appointed the Kulp District Gendarme Commander, who was the hierarchical superior of the gendarmes who were allegedly involved in the incident, as investigating officer. It is also clear from the witness testimonies that the Kulp District Gendarme Commander further delegated the Kulp Gendarme Station Commander to conduct the investigation. In view of the fact that the Kulp Gendarmerie was allegedly accused of being involved in the burning of the applicant’s house, the Court finds it unacceptable that the same gendarme station was delegated to conduct an investigation into the allegations.
75.  In the light of the foregoing, the Court concludes that the authorities failed to conduct a thorough and effective investigation into the applicant’s allegations and that access to any other available remedy, including a claim for compensation, has thus also been denied him.
76.  There has therefore been a breach of Article 13 of the Convention.
VI.  ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 14 OF THE CONVENTION, IN CONJUNCTION WITH ARTICLES 3, 6, 8 AND 13 OF THE CONVENTION AND ARTICLE 1 OF PROTOCOL No. 1
77.  The applicant maintained that, because of his Kurdish origin, he had been subjected to discrimination in breach of Article 14 of the Convention, in conjunction with Articles 3, 6, 8 and 13 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1. Article 14 provides:
“The enjoyment of the rights and freedoms set forth in [the] Convention shall be secured without discrimination on any ground such as sex, race, colour, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, association with a national minority, property, birth or other status.”
78.  The applicant argued that the destruction of his family home and possessions was the result of an official policy, which constituted discrimination because of his status as a member of a national minority.
79.  The Court has examined the applicant’s allegation in the light of the evidence submitted to it, but considers it unsubstantiated. There has therefore been no violation of Article 14 of the Convention.
VII.  ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 18 OF THE CONVENTION
80.  The applicant alleged that the interference or restrictions complained of have been imposed for purposes incompatible with the Convention. He invoked Article 18 of the Convention, which reads:
“The restrictions permitted under [the] Convention to the said rights and freedoms shall not be applied for any purpose other than those for which they have been prescribed.”
81.  The Court points out that it has examined this allegation in the light of the evidence submitted to it, and found that it was unsubstantiated. Accordingly, no violation of this provision has been established.
VIII.  APPLICATION OF ARTICLE 41 OF THE CONVENTION
82.  Article 41 of the Convention provides:
“If the Court finds that there has been a violation of the Convention or the Protocols thereto, and if the internal law of the High Contracting Party concerned allows only partial reparation to be made, the Court shall, if necessary, afford just satisfaction to the injured party.”
A.  Pecuniary Damage
83.  The applicant claimed a total amount of 87,078.82 pounds sterling (GBP) for pecuniary damage in respect of the loss of his house, livestock, household goods, foodstuffs and income.
84.  The Government argued that the applicant’s allegations that his home and possessions had been destroyed by security forces had not been substantiated and that, therefore, there was no requirement to award any compensation.
85.  In view of its finding that the applicant’s home and possessions were destroyed by the security forces (see paragraph 47 above), the Court considers that it is necessary to award compensation for pecuniary damage. However, as the applicant has not supported his claims as to the quantity and value of his lost property with any documentary or other evidence, the Court will make its assessment of the amounts on an equitable basis.
1.  House
86.  The applicant claimed damages in respect of a house covering 240 square metres, which he valued at GBP 15,664.70.
87.  In the absence of any decisive evidence and making its assessment on an equitable basis, the Court awards the amount of 10,000 euros (EUR) in respect of the destroyed building.
2.  Other property
88.  The applicant submitted claims in respect of the loss of household goods, such as furniture, carpets and kitchen utensils and in respect of his livestock. Under this head he claimed GBP 4,732.90.
89.  In view of the absence of any independent and conclusive evidence as to the applicant’s claims for property and on the basis of equity, the Court awards him EUR 6,000.
3.  Loss of income
90.  The applicant also claimed compensation for loss of income from farming. In this respect, he submitted that he had made his living from his land. As a direct consequence of being forced to leave the Akdoruk village, he was no longer able to look after their land and was therefore deprived of the income it had generated. His claims under this head totalled GBP 66,681.21.
91.  The Court is satisfied that the applicant must have suffered a loss of income as a result of being forced from his home and village. In the absence of independent evidence of the applicant’s income from his landholdings, and having regard to equitable considerations, the Court awards him EUR 6,000 under this head.
4.  Summary
92.  Consequently, in respect of pecuniary damage the Court awards the applicant a total sum of EUR 22,000 to be converted into Turkish liras at the rate applicable at the date of settlement.
B.  Non-pecuniary damage
93.  The applicant claimed GBP 15,000 in respect of non-pecuniary damage. He referred in this regard to the pain he had suffered on account of the destruction of his property.
94.  The Government, disputing that any violations had occurred, submitted that no award for non-pecuniary damage should be awarded to the applicant. The Government further contended that, in the event that the Court found a violation, this would be sufficient to compensate for any non-pecuniary damage suffered by the applicant.
95.  The Court considers that an award should be made in respect of non-pecuniary damage bearing in mind the seriousness of the violations which it has found in respect of Articles 3, 8 and 13 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 due to the deliberate destruction of the applicant’s home and property and his subsequent relocation from Akdoruk village.
96.  It accordingly awards the applicant EUR 14,500 for non-pecuniary damage, to be converted into Turkish liras at the rate applicable at the date of payment.
C.  Costs and expenses
97.  Finally, submitting a schedule of costs, the applicant claimed a total sum of GBP 15,523.21 for costs and expenses. These claims comprised:
(a)	GBP 8,835 for fees of United Kingdom-based lawyers;
(b)	GBP 1,158.44 for administrative costs incurred by the United Kingdom-based lawyers;
(c)	GBP 655 for administrative costs incurred by the Kurdish Human Rights Project (“KHRP”);
(d)	GBP 2,000 for translations carried out by the KHRP;
(e)	GBP 2,874.77 for costs incurred by lawyers during the Commission’s fact-finding mission in Ankara.
98.  The Government considered these claims exorbitant and unsubstantiated. They disputed that any sum should be awarded in respect of the role of the KHRP, which organisation could be categorised neither as an applicant nor as a representative.
99.  The Court notes that the present case involved complex issues of fact and law requiring detailed examination, including the taking of evidence from witnesses in Ankara. It reiterates in this connection that only legal costs and expenses necessarily and actually incurred can be reimbursed under Article 41 of the Convention.
100.  Making its own estimate based on the information available, the Court awards the applicant in respect of costs and expenses EUR 15,000 exclusive of any value-added tax that may be chargeable such sum to be converted into pounds sterling and paid into the applicant’s representative’s bank account in the United Kingdom as set out in his just satisfaction claim.
D.  Default interest
101.  The Court considers it appropriate that the default interest should be based on the marginal lending rate of the European Central Bank, to which should be added three percentage points.
FOR THESE REASONS, THE COURT UNANIMOUSLY
1.  Holds that there has been a violation of Article 3 of the Convention;

2.  Holds that there has been no violation of Article 5 of the Convention;

3.  Holds that it is unnecessary to determine whether there has been a breach of Article 6 of the Convention;

4.  Holds that there has been a violation of Article 8 of the Convention;

5.  Holds that there has been a violation of Article 13 of the Convention;

6.  Holds that there has been no violation of Article 14 of the Convention;

7.  Holds that there has been no violation of Article 18 of the Convention;

8.  Holds that there has been a violation of Article 1 of Protocol 1 to the Convention;

9.  Holds
(a)  that the respondent State is to pay the applicant, within three months from the date on which the judgment becomes final according to Article 44 § 2 of the Convention, the following amounts free of any tax that may be chargeable:
(i)  EUR 22,000 (twenty-two thousand euros) in respect of pecuniary damage to be converted into Turkish liras at the rate applicable at the date of payment and to be paid into the applicant’s bank account in Turkey;
(ii)  EUR 14,500 (fourteen thousand five hundred euros) in respect of non-pecuniary damage to be converted into Turkish liras at the rate applicable at the date of payment and to be paid into the applicant’s bank account in Turkey;
(iii)  EUR 15,000 (fifteen thousand euros) in respect of costs and expenses such sum to be converted into pounds sterling and to be paid into the bank account in the United Kingdom indicated by the applicant;
(b)  that from the expiry of the above-mentioned three months until settlement simple interest shall be payable on the above amounts at a rate equal to the marginal lending rate of the European Central Bank during the default period plus three percentage points;

10.  Dismisses the remainder of the applicant’s claim for just satisfaction.
