I.   THE GOVERNMENT’S PRELIMINARY OBJECTION
51.   The Government submitted that the applicants had failed to exhaust their domestic remedies in a number of respects. The Delegate of the Commission explained at the hearing that this plea, although not adverted to in the admissibility decision of 15 May 1992 because the Commission assumed that it had not been maintained, had been raised before the Commission at the appropriate time. The Court therefore has jurisdiction to entertain it (see the Artico v. Italy judgment of 13 May 1980, Series A no. 37, pp. 12-13, paras. 24 and 27).
52.   According to the Government, the applicants failed to exhaust their domestic remedies (a) by not having applied for judicial review either of the Inspectors’ conduct of the inquiry or of their decision to submit their report to the Secretary of State; (b) by not having applied for judicial review of the Secretary of State’s decision to publish the Inspectors’ report; and (c) by not having pursued the libel proceedings commenced against The Observer newspaper.
53.   The grounds on which judicial review may be sought (see paragraphs 44 and 45 above) are such that it would not have ensured access to a court for determination of the truth of statements made about the applicants in the Inspectors’ report, the absence of such access being the essence of their complaints under the Convention. Nor would the libel actions against The Observer, although to some extent concerned with the same subject-matter (see paragraph 11 above), have provided a remedy against the Inspectors or the Secretary of State as regards the publication of the damaging statements contained in the Inspectors’ report.
The Court therefore agrees with the Delegate of the Commission and the applicants that the plea of non-exhaustion of domestic remedies has not been made out by the Government.
II.   ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 6 PARA. 1 (art. 6-1)
54.   The applicants contended that the Inspectors’ investigation and, above all, the publication of the Inspectors’ report gave rise to a violation of Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1), which, in so far as relevant, provides:
"In the determination of his civil rights and obligations ..., everyone is entitled to a fair and public hearing ... by an independent and impartial tribunal established by law ..."
In their submission, the making and the subsequent publication of the Inspectors’ report in its entirety seriously damaged their reputations, thereby determining their civil right to honour and reputation, and the state of English law was such that they were denied effective access to the courts to challenge the resultant interference with that civil right.
This contention was accepted neither by the Government nor by the majority of the Commission.
A. Investigation by the Inspectors
55.   The first stage of the applicants’ argument, which was disputed by the Government and not accepted by the Commission, was that Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) was applicable to the investigation by the Inspectors.
56.   In order for an individual to be entitled to a hearing before a tribunal, there must exist a "dispute" ("contestation") over one of his or her civil rights or obligations. It follows, so the Court’s case-law has explained, that the result of the proceedings in question must be directly decisive for such a right or obligation, mere tenuous connections or remote consequences not being sufficient to bring Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) into play (see, inter alia, the Le Compte, Van Leuven and De Meyere v. Belgium judgment of 23 June 1981, Series A no. 43, pp. 20-22, paras. 44-50).
57.   The applicants claimed to identify three different disputes (contestations) arising in and during the investigation by the Inspectors: firstly, the dispute between the applicants and Lonrho, which the applicants described as giving rise to and forming the subject-matter of the proceedings conducted by the Inspectors; secondly, a dispute between the applicants and the Inspectors, in that the applicants had contested the Inspectors’ actions in investigating their honesty and then arriving at conclusions in this regard; and, thirdly, a dispute between the applicants and the Secretary of State, in that, notwithstanding their opposition, the Secretary of State had initially considered there to be circumstances suggesting dishonest conduct by them, and had thereafter adopted the contents of the Inspectors’ report, so they asserted, and decided to publish it.
In the applicants’ submission, one of the objects of the inquiry by the Inspectors was to make findings as to whether the applicants were guilty of misconduct and the central conclusion of the report was that the applicants had dishonestly misled the authorities. Even though the Inspectors’ role may in theory have been investigative, the manner in which they performed their functions in the present case was in fact determinative. The Inspectors’ report, published to the world at large, had the force of a judgment convicting the applicants of dishonesty. The result of the inquiry was thus directly decisive for the applicants’ civil right to a good reputation. In short, so they argued, the Inspectors’ report effectively "determined" their civil right to reputation without any of the procedural guarantees of Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) being respected.
58.   Having regard to the cases of Golder v. the United Kingdom (judgment of 21 February 1975, Series A no. 18, p. 13, para. 27) and Helmers v. Sweden (judgment of 29 October 1991, Series A no. 212-A, p. 14, para. 27), the respondent Government did not dispute the existence and "civil" character of the right under English law to a good reputation.
However, they submitted that neither the investigation by the Inspectors nor the publication of the report "determined" the applicants’ civil right to a good reputation or, indeed, any right at all. The principal purpose of the investigation and report of the Inspectors, they maintained, was to acquire, marshal and set down factual information which would enable the various competent authorities - such as the Director General of Fair Trading, the prosecuting authorities, the Bank of England, the Takeover Panel and the Secretary of State (see paragraphs 23, 27, 30 and 34 above) - to decide what action, if any, to take. Four further purposes also existed, none of which, however, included ascertaining whether the applicants merited their good reputation. These additional purposes were dispelling public speculation about the events surrounding the takeover, enabling those concerned in takeovers to learn lessons, laying the foundations for reform of company law and practice, and providing information to HOF’s employees, shareholders and creditors.
59.   The Commission, after analysing the purposes served by the preparation and publication of the Inspectors’ report, came to the conclusion that the Inspectors had an "investigative rather than determinative" role (paragraph 64 of the Commission’s report). The Commission was therefore of the opinion that Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) was not applicable to the proceedings conducted by Inspectors because those proceedings did not determine any civil right or obligation of the applicants.
60.   The Court notes that under the terms of section 432 (2) of the Companies Act 1985 Inspectors can only be appointed if it appears to the Secretary of State that there are circumstances suggesting one or more types of specified wrongdoing or unlawful action in the conduct of a company’s affairs (see paragraph 36 above). The Act confers on the Inspectors wide powers to obtain information and obstruction of the Inspectors may, upon reference by them to a court, be treated by it as a contempt of court and punished accordingly (sections 434 and 436 of the Act - see paragraph 38 above). The principal question addressed by the Inspectors in the instant case can be reduced to whether the Fayed brothers had dishonestly misled the authorities and the public in order to obtain Government clearance and acceptance by the HOF Board of their bid (see paragraphs 13 and 14 above). The Inspectors’ published findings - that the applicants had indeed made dishonest representations concerning their origins, their wealth, their business interests and their resources and had thereafter knowingly submitted false evidence to the Inspectors (see paragraph 22 above) - undoubtedly damaged the applicants’ reputations. The competent Ministers and a Parliamentary Select Committee - quite apart, it can be supposed, from a substantial section of public opinion - showed a disposition to accept as correct these findings, publication of which was seen as a kind of sanction (see paragraphs 26, 30, 31, 33 and 34 above).
Such elements or consequences are, it is true, not infrequently found in the context of adjudicatory proceedings.
61.   However, the Court is satisfied that the functions performed by the Inspectors were, in practice as well as in theory, essentially investigative (see the similar analysis by the Supreme Court of the United States of America of the function of the Federal Civil Rights Commission in the case of Hannah v. Larche (363 US 420 (1960)). The Inspectors did not adjudicate, either in form or in substance. They themselves said in their report that their findings would not be dispositive of anything (see paragraph 21 above). They did not make a legal determination as to criminal or civil liability concerning the Fayed brothers, and in particular concerning the latter’s civil right to honour and reputation. The purpose of their inquiry was to ascertain and record facts which might subsequently be used as the basis for action by other competent authorities - prosecuting, regulatory, disciplinary or even legislative.
Lonrho admittedly exhibited a clear interest in the inquiry and its outcome, by being instrumental in bringing about the appointment of the Inspectors, by submitting evidence and by seeking to prompt action by the Secretary of State (see paragraphs 12 in fine, 13, 19, 24, 25 and 35 above). The Inspectors described Lonrho and the Fayed brothers as "bitterly antagonistic parties" (see paragraph 19 in fine above). Nonetheless, whilst there was a close connection between Lonrho’s grievance against the Fayed brothers and the matters investigated by the Inspectors (see, inter alia, paragraphs 10-13 and 22 above), the object of the proceedings before the Inspectors was not to resolve any dispute (contestation) between Lonrho and the applicants. Those disputes, and in particular the applicants’ libel claims that Lonrho, through The Observer, had wrongfully damaged their reputations, were being adjudicated by the ordinary courts (see paragraphs 11 and 12 above). Likewise, no dispute (contestation) between the Secretary of State or the Inspectors and the applicants as to the lawfulness of any alleged interference with the applicants’ right to reputation arose merely because the applicants contested the grounds on which the Minister decided to appoint the Inspectors and on which the Inspectors conducted their lines of inquiry.
In short, it cannot be said that the Inspectors’ inquiry "determined" the applicants’ civil right to a good reputation, for the purposes of Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1), or that its result was directly decisive for that right.
62.   Acceptance of the applicants’ argument would entail that a body carrying out preparatory investigations at the instance of regulatory or other authorities should always be subject to the guarantees of a judicial procedure set forth in Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) by reason of the fact that publication of its findings is liable to damage the reputation of the individuals whose conduct is being investigated. Such an interpretation of Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) would in practice unduly hamper the effective regulation in the public interest of complex financial and commercial activities. In the Court’s view, investigative proceedings of the kind in issue in the present case fall outside the ambit and intendment of Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1).
63.   The Court accordingly concludes that the investigation by the Inspectors was not such as to attract the application of Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1).
B. Proceedings to contest the Inspectors’ findings
64.   The Inspectors’ report, published to the world at large, contained statements damaging to the applicants’ reputations.
The applicants argued that English law denied them their entitlement under Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) to access to a court to have determined whether there was any justification for this attack on their reputations. In particular, they stated, there was no opportunity under English law, whether by way of defamation proceedings or by way of judicial review, to challenge the Inspectors’ condemnatory findings of fact or conclusions before a tribunal satisfying the requirements of Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1).
1. Relevant principles
65.   In the words of the Court’s Golder judgment, "... Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) secures to everyone the right to have any claim relating to his civil rights and obligations brought before a court or tribunal. In this way the Article (art. 6-1) embodies the ‘right to a court’, of which the right of access, that is the right to institute proceedings before courts in civil matters, constitutes one aspect only" (loc. cit., p. 18, para. 36). This right to a court "extends only to ‘contestations’ (disputes) over (civil) ‘rights and obligations’ which can be said, at least on arguable grounds, to be recognised under domestic law; [Article 6 para. 1] (art. 6-1) does not in itself guarantee any particular content for (civil) ‘rights and obligations’ in the substantive law of the Contracting States" (see, inter alia, the James and Others v. the United Kingdom judgment of 21 February 1986, Series A no. 98, pp. 46-47, para. 81; and the Powell and Rayner v. the United Kingdom judgment of 21 February 1990, Series A no. 172, p.16, para. 36).
Whether a person has an actionable domestic claim may depend not only on the substantive content, properly speaking, of the relevant civil right as defined under national law but also on the existence of procedural bars preventing or limiting the possibilities of bringing potential claims to court. In the latter kind of case Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) may have a degree of applicability. Certainly the Convention enforcement bodies may not create by way of interpretation of Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) a substantive civil right which has no legal basis in the State concerned. However, it would not be consistent with the rule of law in a democratic society or with the basic principle underlying Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) - namely that civil claims must be capable of being submitted to a judge for adjudication - if, for example, a State could, without restraint or control by the Convention enforcement bodies, remove from the jurisdiction of the courts a whole range of civil claims or confer immunities from civil liability on large groups or categories of persons (see the Commission’s admissibility decision of 9 October 1984 on application no. 10475/83, Dyer v. the United Kingdom, Decisions and Reports 39, pp. 246-66 at pp. 251-52).
The relevant principles have been stated by the Court as follows:
"(a) The right of access to the courts secured by Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) is not absolute but may be subject to limitations; these are permitted by implication since the right of access ‘by its very nature calls for regulation by the State, regulation which may vary in time and in place according to the needs and resources of the community and of individuals’.
(b) In laying down such regulation, the Contracting States enjoy a certain margin of appreciation, but the final decision as to observance of the Convention’s requirements rests with the Court. It must be satisfied that the limitations applied do not restrict or reduce the access left to the individual in such a way or to such an extent that the very essence of the right is impaired.
(c) Furthermore, a limitation will not be compatible with Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) if it does not pursue a legitimate aim and if there is not a reasonable relationship of proportionality between the means employed and the aim sought to be achieved."
(Lithgow and Others v. the United Kingdom judgment of 8 July 1986, Series A no. 102, p. 71, para. 194, citing the Ashingdane v. the United Kingdom judgment of 28 May 1985, Series A no. 93, pp. 24-25, para. 57)
These principles reflect the process, inherent in the Court’s task under the Convention, of striking a fair balance between the demands of the general interest of the community and the requirements of the protection of the individual’s fundamental rights (see, inter alia, the Sporrong and Lönnroth v. Sweden judgment of 23 September 1982, Series A no. 52, p. 26, para. 69).
2.  Applicability of Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1)
66.   In the Government’s submission, the defence of privilege delimited the very content of the applicants’ right to a good reputation as protected under English law. They maintained that, unlike procedural barriers to access to court, such an exercise by the State of the power to fix the content of a particular civil right did not bring into play Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1), although it might on occasions raise an issue in relation to one or other of the substantive rights protected by the Convention (such as the right to respect for private life under Article 8) (art. 8). In the circumstances, they concluded, the applicants had no actionable claim to a civil right under English law so as to attract the application of Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1).
The Commission and the applicants, on the other hand, considered that the defence amounted to a limitation on the right to bring defamation proceedings and, as such, a restriction on effective access to court.
67.   It is not always an easy matter to trace the dividing line between procedural and substantive limitations of a given entitlement under domestic law. It may sometimes be no more than a question of legislative technique whether the limitation is expressed in terms of the right or its remedy.
In the present case the Court does not consider it necessary to settle the question of the precise nature of the defence of privilege for the purposes of Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1), since it is devoid of significance in the particular circumstances. If the Court were to treat the facts underlying the complaints declared admissible by the Commission as raising a substantive, rather than a procedural, complaint going to the right to respect for private life under Article 8 (art. 8) of the Convention - as it has jurisdiction to do (see the Handyside v. the United Kingdom judgment of 7 December 1976, Series A no. 24, pp. 19-20, para. 41) -, the same central issues of legitimate aim and proportionality as under Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) would be posed.
The Court therefore proposes to proceed on the basis that Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) is applicable to the facts of the case, the argument before the Court having been directed solely to this Article.
68.   On this approach, it has to be ascertained whether the contested limitation on the applicants’ ability to take legal proceedings to challenge the findings and conclusions in the Inspectors’ report which were damaging to their reputations satisfied the conditions stated in the Court’s case-law.
3. Legitimacy of the aims pursued by the contested limitation
69.   The legitimacy of the limitation complained of cannot be divorced from its context, namely the system of investigation and reporting under the Companies Act 1985.
The underlying aim of this system is clearly the furtherance of the public interest in the proper conduct of the affairs of public companies whose owners benefit from limited liability. Considerations of public interest dictate both the appointment of Inspectors and the publication or not of their report (see paragraphs 36, 40 and 41 above). The system contributes to safeguarding the interests of the various parties concerned in the affairs of public companies such as investors, shareholders, especially small shareholders, creditors, customers, trading partners and employees, as well as ensuring the overall soundness and credibility of the country’s company law structures. In the words of the Commission’s report (at paragraph 64), "it is ... necessary in a democratic society that governments exercise supervisory controls over large commercial activities in order to ensure good management practices and the transparency of honest dealings".
As regards the particular facts complained of by the applicant brothers, the Court accepts as accurate the Government’s analysis of the purposes served by the making and publication of the Inspectors’ report (see paragraphs 28 and 58 above - see also paragraphs 13, 14 and 30 above as regards the particular facts).
The investigation into the affairs of HOFH and the publication of the resultant report in themselves therefore pursued legitimate aims.
70.   As to the contested limitation on the ability to take legal proceedings, it was common ground that any defamation action brought by the applicants against the Inspectors or the Secretary of State would have been successfully met with a defence of privilege, be it absolute or qualified (see paragraphs 42 and 43 above). The rationale of this defence is that statements which harm an individual’s reputation and which would otherwise give rise to liability should benefit from total or partial immunity because their author or publisher is acting in furtherance of some overriding interest of social importance (see paragraph 42 above). As regards more specifically investigations under the Companies Act, the British courts have explained that "the public interest demands" that "Inspectors should make their report with courage and frankness" (per Lord Denning in re Pergamon Press Ltd - see paragraph 43 above).
Like the Commission, the Court has no difficulty in accepting that the underlying objective in according Inspectors freedom to report in this manner is likewise legitimate.
4. Proportionality of the means employed
71.   It remains to be determined whether in the circumstances of the particular case there was a reasonable relationship of proportionality between the means employed and the legitimate objectives pursued by the contested limitation.
72.   Before the Court the applicants appeared to shift the emphasis of their argument as compared with their submissions to the Commission. Whilst continuing to maintain that the means employed were disproportionate to the aim pursued, they stressed that their complaint was not directed against the defence of privilege as such. They were not asserting a right to hold the Inspectors or the Secretary of State personally liable for damages in a suit for defamation; nor were they arguing that such independent reports into the affairs of public companies should never be prepared or published. Rather their claim was that where a report by organs of the State has branded an individual as being guilty of wrongdoing such as dishonesty after a procedure not attended by the procedural guarantees of a fair trial, Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) grants the individual whose reputation is at stake the right to challenge the findings against him or her in a court of law before publication of the report. Accepting that a cause of action based on libel was barred and that judicial review did not provide the desired remedy, some other form of effective access to the courts should have been available to them for this purpose by virtue of Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1).
The English legal system, in their view, lacked adequate safeguards to protect their civil right to honour and reputation against misuse of their powers by the Inspectors and the Secretary of State. They submitted that means which involved denying them any effective remedy at all for the attack on their reputations caused disproportionate harm to them. They suggested that the requisite fair balance between the competing interests would be secured by the Government adopting a system which satisfied the aim pursued in a manner less harmful to their human rights, such as publication of the report only following full judicial scrutiny of the Inspectors’ findings of fact.
73.   In its report, the Commission expressed the opinion that the principle of proportionality had not been transgressed in the applicants’ case. In its view, judicial review, whilst not affording complete protection against possibly erroneous conclusions by the Inspectors, did "provide sufficient guarantees for persons affected by the report, which [were] proportionate to the general public interest in inquiries of the present kind" (paragraph 75 of the report).
74.   In so far as the defence of privilege was taken to be a procedural bar on access, the Government agreed with the Commission’s analysis. As they perceived it, the applicants’ claim was really based on the impracticable proposition that a person aggrieved at any conclusion of fact reached by Inspectors acting under section 432 (2) of the Companies Act 1985 because of some detrimental effect on his or her reputation ought, by virtue of Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1), to have a right of appeal to a court to challenge that conclusion.
75.   The Court recognises that limitations on access to court may be more extensive when regulation of activities in the public sphere is at stake than in relation to litigation over the conduct of persons acting in their private capacity. As to enforcement of the right to a good reputation under domestic law, the limits of acceptable criticism are wider with regard to businessmen actively involved in the affairs of large public companies than with regard to private individuals, to paraphrase a principle enunciated by the Court in the context of the State’s power to restrict freedom of expression in accordance with Article 10 para. 2 (art. 10-2) of the Convention (see the Oberschlick v. Austria judgment of 23 May 1991, Series A no. 204, p. 26, para. 59). Persons, such as the applicants, who fall into the former category of businessmen inevitably and knowingly lay themselves open to close scrutiny of their acts, not only by the press but also and above all by bodies representing the public interest (ibid.).
76.   An additional point to note as concerns the particular circumstances of the present case is that the findings in the Inspectors’ report to which the applicants took exception related to matters which the applicants themselves had made great efforts to bring into the public domain, namely their family background, their personal wealth and their business activities (see paragraphs 9 and 22 above). The beneficial public reputation which the applicants enjoyed in late 1984 and early 1985 was largely the result of an active public relations campaign which they undertook with the assistance of their advisers, and it played a crucial role in facilitating clearance of their bid for HOF. Thereafter the applicants were at pains to stifle any publicity adverse to this favourable reputation which they had themselves largely created, as is shown by their threatened or actual libel actions against various newspapers, notably The Observer (see paragraph 11 above). The contested limitation was thus concerned with an investigation of circumstances offered to public scrutiny by persons who had themselves sought a public profile through their bid to take over a large public company.
77.   Like the Commission, the Court does not find it decisive whether the Inspectors’ report benefited from absolute or merely qualified privilege (see paragraphs 42 and 43 above). In any event, in their argument to the Court the applicants did not suggest that either the Inspectors or the successive Secretaries of State had acted with malicious intent, which would have destroyed a defence of qualified privilege.
78.   In arriving at their findings of fact or conclusions, the Inspectors were under a duty to act fairly and to give anyone whom they proposed to criticise in their report a fair opportunity to answer the allegations against them. Although the investigation was administrative and not judicial in nature, the Inspectors were bound by what are known under English law as "the rules of natural justice" (see paragraph 39 above). The remedy of judicial review was available to the applicants against the Inspectors or the Secretary of State to challenge the appointment of the Inspectors, the making of the report, its content or its publication if it could be claimed that there had been unfairness or breach of the rules of natural justice or that the findings or conclusions were unreliable on a number of other grounds (see paragraphs 44 and 45 above). In the latter connection, judicial review would have provided relief if it could have been established that the Inspectors had made findings of fact not properly based on material with probative value, or reached conclusions which there were no facts to support, or taken into account irrelevant considerations or failed to take account of relevant considerations, or reached conclusions which no reasonable person in their position could have reached (ibid.).
Judicial review would not, it is true, have provided the applicants with "the effective remedy" to which they were claiming to be entitled under Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1), namely a remedy enabling them to argue before a court that the Inspectors’ findings of fact were simply erroneous. Nonetheless, the manner in which findings detrimental to a person’s reputation are arrived at in an administrative investigation, as well as the objectives pursued by the investigation, is relevant for assessing the permissibility under Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) of a limitation on the person’s opportunities to go to court to enforce his or her civil right to reputation.
Whilst Inspectors are accorded broad freedom in reporting on the affairs of public companies, the performance of their investigative functions is attended by not inconsiderable safeguards intended to ensure a fair procedure and the reliability of findings of fact.
79.   Extremely serious accusations were levelled against the Inspectors by the applicants in the press release issued by them on the day of the publication of the Inspectors’ report, including accusations of dishonesty, prejudice, non-respect of agreed procedures, unfairness and total disregard of the principles of natural justice (see paragraph 32 above). In correspondence with the authorities the applicants had previously been consistently threatening to take legal action to contest the report and its publication; yet in the event they did not do so, despite a formal undertaking on behalf of the Secretary of State to hold up publication if proceedings were brought (see paragraph 29 above). As the Government pointed out, a reading of the Inspectors’ report shows that the applicants were made aware of the information required of them and were given every reasonable opportunity to respond to the allegations made against them and to furnish evidence, notwithstanding their last-minute procedural request to the Inspectors (see paragraphs 20 and 21 above). Safeguards afforded to the applicants throughout the investigation included constant consultation by the Inspectors as regards the structure, procedure and lines of inquiry of the investigation, the professional representation of the applicants, at interviews as well as in the submission of evidence and argument, and the Inspectors’ concern to respect the applicants’ personal privacy as much as possible (see paragraphs 15 to 18 and 20 above).
80.   The applicants pointed out that the Inspectors’ report containing findings of dishonesty was published, with the benefit of protection from liability in defamation, even though the authorities decided that there was no cause for instituting either criminal or civil proceedings (see paragraphs 23, 27, 28 and 30 above). The Court has also taken note of the evidence submitted by the applicants showing that there is a body of informed opinion in the United Kingdom which believes that these consequences of the system enacted by Parliament in the Companies Act 1985 are not desirable.
81.   It is not, however, for the Court to substitute its own view for that of the national legislature as to what would be the most appropriate policy in this regard. The risk of some uncompensated damage to reputation is inevitable if independent investigators in circumstances such as those of the present case are to have the necessary freedom to report without fear, not only to the authorities but also in the final resort to the public. It is in the first place for the national authorities to determine the extent to which the individual’s interest in full protection of his or her reputation should yield to the requirements of the community’s interest in independent investigation of the affairs of large public companies. The applicants’ argument would amount to reading into Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) an entitlement to have a report such as the one in the present case not published until after a full judicial hearing repeating, doubtless over a longer time-scale, the same fact-finding exercise as that already carried out by the Inspectors. Such an entitlement could effectively destroy the utility of informing the public of the results of the administrative investigations provided for under section 432 (2) of the Companies Act 1985. Having found the aim of not only making but also publishing Inspectors’ reports to be legitimate, the Court cannot apply the test of proportionality in such a way as to render publication impracticable.
82.   In the light of the foregoing considerations, the Court cannot find that, in the exercise of their responsibility of regulating the conduct of the affairs of public companies, the national authorities exceeded their margin of appreciation to limit the applicant brothers’ access to the courts under Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1), either as regards the state of the applicable law or as regards the effects of the application of that law to the brothers. Having regard in particular to the safeguards that did exist in relation to the impugned investigation, the Court concludes that a reasonable relationship of proportionality can be said to have existed between the freedom of reporting accorded to the Inspectors and the legitimate aim pursued in the public interest.
5. Conclusion
83.   In the Court’s view, the limitation on the applicants’ opportunity, before and after publication of the Inspectors’ report, to take legal proceedings to challenge the Inspectors’ findings damaging to their reputations did not involve an unjustified denial of their "right to a court" under Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1).
C. Proceedings against others
84.   A further issue addressed in the Commission’s report was whether the publication of the Inspectors’ report rendered impossible a fair and unbiased trial of the libel actions brought by the applicants against The Observer newspaper (see paragraphs 13 and 34 above), such that they were thereby denied effective access to court for the determination of a dispute over their civil right to honour and reputation.
This complaint was not pursued by the applicants in their pleadings before the Court, and the Court sees no cause, in law or on the facts, to examine it of its own motion.
D. Recapitulation
85.   The Court finds no violation of Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) in the present case under any of the heads of complaint.
III.   ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 13 (art. 13)
86.   Before the Commission the applicants alleged that, contrary to Article 13 (art. 13) of the Convention, no effective remedy was available under English law in respect of their complaint of a violation of Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) of the Convention. Article 13 (art. 13) provides:
"Everyone whose rights and freedoms as set forth in [the] Convention are violated shall have an effective remedy before a national authority notwithstanding that the violation has been committed by persons acting in an official capacity."
87.   The Commission concluded in its report that no separate issue arose under Article 13 (art. 13). In their memorial to the Court, the applicants announced that they would not be seeking to contest the Commission’s conclusion.
88.   In view of the applicants’ effective withdrawal of this complaint, the Court does not find it necessary also to examine the case under Article 13 (art. 13).
FOR THESE REASONS, THE COURT UNANIMOUSLY
1.    Dismisses the Government’s preliminary objection;

2.    Holds that there has been no breach of Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) of the Convention;

3.    Holds that it is not necessary also to examine the case under Article 13 (art. 13) of the Convention.

Done in English and in French, and delivered at a public hearing in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 21 September 1994.

Rolv RYSSDAL
President

Herbert PETZOLD
Acting Registrar

In accordance with Article 51 para. 2 (art. 51-2) of the Convention and Rule 53 para. 2 of the Rules of Court, the concurring opinion of Mr Martens is annexed to this judgment.

R. R.
H. P.
 
 
CONCURRING OPINION OF JUDGE MARTENS
1.    The applicants submitted that Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) was violated because the defence of privilege amounted to a restriction on their right of access to court with respect to the statements in the Inspectors’ report which were damaging to their reputation (paragraph 64 of the Court’s judgment).
2.    The Government denied the applicability of Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) since in their opinion the applicants had no actionable claim to a civil right under English law (paragraph 66).
3.    The outcome of the Court’s reasoning in paragraphs 65-67 of its judgment is that the Court "proposes to proceed on the basis that Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) is applicable to the facts of the case". I support that modus procedendi, although I find it difficult to subscribe to the reasoning which led to it.
4.    The starting-point for the Court’s reasoning is its doctrine that Article 6 (art. 6) "extends only to ‘contestations’ (disputes) over (civil) ‘rights and obligations’ which can be said, at least on arguable grounds, to be recognised under domestic law" (paragraph 65).
5.    In my concurring opinion in the case of Salerno v. Italy (judgment of 12 October 1992, Series A no. 245-D, pp. 57 et seq.), I examined the genesis of this doctrine. In paragraph 3.4 of that opinion I recalled that the doctrine had been fundamentally criticised on repeated occasions by several judges , but I left open whether I too subscribed to that criticism. I came to the conclusion that in any event there was no room for the "arguable claim" test where the applicant has in fact had access to a court which has decided on the merits of his claim: a decision on a non-arguable claim should also meet the requirements of Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1).
6.    The present case demonstrates that also within the context of an access-to-court issue the "arguable claim" test is an unfortunate feature of the Court’s case-law . It has obliged the Court to adopt a reasoning whose subtleness, to my mind, seems hardly convincing. Nor clear, for what does it mean to say that "Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) may have a degree of applicability" and in what cases will this extraordinary phenomenon occur? When does the answer to the question whether a person has an actionable domestic claim depend not only on the substantive content of the relevant right as defined under national law but also on the existence of procedural bars?
7.    In my opinion the Court’s reasoning would have been simpler and more persuasive without all this meandering necessitated by its maintaining the "arguable claim" test: there could be no doubt as to the applicants’ right to reputation having been damaged. Whether or not a right to reputation is enshrined in Article 8 (art. 8) of the Convention is immaterial, since such a right does exist, at least in principle, under all our national laws and it has not been contended that in this respect English law makes an exception by clearly and fully excluding such a right. Neither can there be doubt as to the right to reputation being a "civil" right within the autonomous meaning of that notion under Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1). It follows that under this provision, whenever a person’s reputation has been interfered with, he or she is in principle entitled to access to a court meeting its requirements. Consequently, the question whether under English law the defence of privilege constitutes a substantive limitation on the content of the right to reputation or a procedural barrier to access to court is immaterial. On this approach the Court could have gone into the essential question whether the contested limitation was justified under the conditions stated in its case-law (paragraph 68) almost immediately.

