I.  ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 6 § 1 OF THE CONVENTION
48.  The applicant complained that the length of the maintenance payment proceedings had been incompatible with the “reasonable time” principle as provided in Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, which reads as follows:
In the determination of his civil rights and obligations......, everyone is entitled to a fair...hearing within reasonable time... by[a]... tribunal”
49.  As regards the first set of proceedings, the period to be taken into consideration began on 3 January 1990 and ended on 22 May 1999. Thus, they lasted more than nine years and four months. 
50.  As regards the second set of proceedings, the period to be taken into consideration began on 4 September 1990 and ended on 25 February 1999. Thus, they lasted for more than eight years and five months.
A.  Admissibility
51.  The Court notes that this complaint is not manifestly ill-founded within the meaning of Article 35 § 3 of the Convention. It further notes that it is not inadmissible on any other grounds. It must therefore be declared admissible.
B.  Merits
52.  The Government submitted that the maintenance proceedings were complex. In particular, they had to be seen as a part of highly complex custody proceedings which required extensive expert opinions. While the authorities tried to conduct the proceedings expeditiously, the applicant filed a multitude of motions of bias, appeals and requests for extension of time-limits and therefore herself contributed considerably to the length of the proceedings. The Government further stressed that the applicant repeatedly thwarted attempts to deliver summons on her and failed to obey them. 
53.  The applicant did not submit any observations on these issues.
54.  The Court reiterates that the reasonableness of the length of proceedings must be assessed in the light of the circumstances of the case and with reference to the criteria established by its case-law, particularly the complexity of the case, the conduct of the applicant and of the relevant authorities and what was at stake for the applicant in the dispute (see, among many other authorities, Frydlender v. France [GC], no. 30979/96, § 43, ECHR 2000-VII).
55.  The Court considers that the present proceedings can clearly be distinguished from the custody proceedings, as they concerned merely the fixing of maintenance payments and were not particularly complex. 
56.  As regards the conduct of the applicant the Court has consistently held that applicants cannot be blamed for making full use of the remedies available to them under domestic law. However, an applicant's behaviour constitutes an objective fact which cannot be attributed to the respondent State and which must be taken into account for the purpose of determining whether or not the reasonable time referred to in Article 6 § 1 has been exceeded (see Erkner and Hofbauer v. Austria, no. 9616/81, Commission decision of 23 April 1987, A 117, § 68) 
57.  In the present case, the Court acknowledges that the applicant had filed numerous requests, complaints and motions and had repeatedly failed to obey the authorities' summons. Although such conduct contributed to prolonging the proceedings, it is not in itself sufficient to explain the length of the extensive proceedings. 
58.  On the other hand, the Court notes that there are substantial delays attributable to the authorities. In particular, in the first set of proceedings, there is a period of inactivity of more than two years (from 3 January 1990 to 10 February 1992) while the case was pending before the Vienna Juvenile Court, and a further one of six years (from 13 May 1992 to 20 May 1998) before that court took a new decision after the first one had been quashed on appeal. In the second set of proceedings, there is a period of inactivity of some three years (from 4 September 1990 to 10 August 1993), while the case was pending before the Vienna Juvenile Court, and a further such period of three years and seven months (from 5 January 1995 to 5 August 1998) before that court took a new decision after the first one had been quashed on appeal. The Court cannot find that the Government has given sufficient explanation for these delays that occurred.
59.  The Court therefore finds that the overall length of the proceedings cannot be regarded as “reasonable”. Accordingly, there has been a violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention. 

II. APPLICATION OF ARTICLE 41 OF THE CONVENTION
60.  Article 41 of the Convention provides:
“If the Court finds that there has been a violation of the Convention or the Protocols thereto, and if the internal law of the High Contracting Party concerned allows only partial reparation to be made, the Court shall, if necessary, afford just satisfaction to the injured party.”
61.  The applicant has not filed a claim for just satisfaction. Accordingly, the Court considers that no award can be made under this provision.
 
FOR THESE REASONS, THE COURT UNANIMOUSLY
1.  Declares the application admissible;

2.  Holds that there has been a violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention;

Done in English, and notified in writing on 11 December 2003, pursuant to Rule 77 §§ 2 and 3 of the Rules of Court.
Vincent BERGER	Georg RESS
	Registrar	President
