I.   SCOPE OF THE CASE
43.   In his memorial to the Court and at the hearing the applicant complained of the secretive and unfair manner in which his tariff (see paragraph 27 above) had been established.
44.   The Court notes that this particular complaint was not dealt with by the Commission in its report or admissibility decision and that, as pointed out by the Delegate of the Commission, it is uncertain whether it can be regarded as falling within the compass of the case before the Court as delimited by the Commission’s decision on admissibility (see, inter alia, the Powell and Rayner v. the United Kingdom judgment of 21 February 1990, Series A no. 172, p. 13, para. 29). In any event, given the fact that the applicant’s punitive period has now expired, the Court does not consider it necessary to examine this complaint. The scope of the case before the Court is therefore confined to the issues under Article 5 para. 4 (art. 5-4) raised in connection with the applicant’s current situation, that is post-tariff detention.
II.   ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 5 PARA. 4 (art. 5-4) OF THE CONVENTION
45.   Mr Hussain complained that he had not been able at reasonable intervals to have the case of his continued detention during Her Majesty’s pleasure (see paragraph 20 above) heard by a court. He invoked Article 5 para. 4 (art. 5-4) of the Convention which provides:
"Everyone who is deprived of his liberty by arrest ordetention shall be entitled to take proceedings by whichthe lawfulness of his detention shall be decided speedilyby a court and his release ordered if the detention isnot lawful."
46.   The Court will first examine whether, having regard to the particular features of detention during Her Majesty’s pleasure, the requirements of Article 5 para. 4 (art. 5-4) are satisfied by the original trial and appeal proceedings or, on the contrary, whether that provision (art. 5-4) confers an additional right to challenge the lawfulness of the continued detention before a court.
A. Whether the requisite judicial control was incorporated in the original conviction
47.   In the applicant’s submission, a sentence of detention during Her Majesty’s pleasure differed from the mandatory life sentence imposed on adults (see paragraph 20 above), which the Court examined in its Wynne v. the United Kingdom judgment of 18 July 1994 (Series A no. 294-A), in that the former is not solely based on the gravity of the offence but takes into account the age of the offender. The principle that crimes committed by young persons should not be punished as severely as the crimes of adults is, in the applicant’s submission, contained in all civilised penal codes. In this respect, the purpose of a sentence of detention during Her Majesty’s pleasure is not wholly punitive in character but partly punitive and partly preventive.
In support of his argument the applicant referred to the historical origins of the expression "during Her Majesty’s pleasure" (the Criminal Lunatics Act 1800 and the Children’s Act 1908 - see paragraphs 21 and 23 above) in which context it had a clear preventive purpose. He further referred to the wording of section 53 of the 1933 Act ("a person [under 18] ... shall not, if ... convicted of murder, be sentenced to imprisonment for life" - see paragraph 23 above) and to the indeterminacy of the very formula used in the sentence ("during Her Majesty’s pleasure").
In view of the above, the applicant concluded that a sentence of detention under section 53 was closer in its indeterminacy and preventive objectives to a discretionary life sentence, as examined by the Court in the case of Thynne, Wilson and Gunnell cited above than to a mandatory life sentence. As in that case, after the tariff has expired, the only legitimate basis for the applicant’s continued detention would be a finding of his continued dangerousness, a characteristic susceptible to change with the passage of time (ibid., p. 30, para. 76). This was particularly so in the case of offenders who could be as young as ten at the time of the commission of the offence. It follows that at that phase in the execution of his sentence, the applicant was entitled under Article 5 para. 4 (art. 5-4) to have the lawfulness of his continued detention determined by a court at reasonable intervals.
48.   The Commission agreed in substance with the applicant’s submissions and added that the absence of the word "life" in the sentence reinforced its indeterminate character. The Commission further noted the trial judge’s comments with regard to the dangerousness of the applicant (see paragraph 8 above).
49.   The Government, for their part, contended that the sentence of detention during Her Majesty’s pleasure has an essentially punitive character and is imposed automatically on all juvenile murderers on the strength of the gravity of their offence, regardless of their mental state or dangerousness. This explains why under the Criminal Justice Act 1991 the same release procedures govern both mandatory life sentences passed on adults and sentences of detention during Her Majesty’s pleasure and why the same administrative policies are applied to both (see paragraphs 25 and 29 above). Furthermore, after the tariff period has elapsed, not only the prisoner’s dangerousness but also the acceptability to the public of his early release must be considered with a view to maintaining public confidence in the system of criminal justice (see paragraph 32 above).
It was further contended that, apart from the fact that persons sentenced to detention during Her Majesty’s pleasure would not be detained in a prison during the early stages of their detention but in a special institution for young offenders, the sentence was nothing more than the statutory equivalent for young persons of the mandatory life sentence for adults. In these circumstances, the issues in the present case were practically identical to those in the Wynne case (cited above at paragraph 47) where the Court found that the original trial and appeal proceedings satisfied the requirements of Article 5 para. 4 (art. 5-4) of the Convention.
50.   The Court notes at the outset that, as has been commonly accepted, the central issue in the present case is whether detention during Her Majesty’s pleasure, given its nature and purpose, should be assimilated, under the case-law on the Convention, to a mandatory sentence of life imprisonment or rather to a discretionary sentence of life imprisonment. In dealing with this issue the Court must therefore decide whether the substance of a sentence of detention under section 53 is more closely related to that at the heart of the cases of Weeks v. the United Kingdom (judgment of 2 March 1987, Series A no. 114) and Thynne, Wilson and Gunnell (cited above at paragraph 34) or to that in the more recent case of Wynne v. the United Kingdom (cited at paragraph 47).
51.   It is true, as submitted by the Government, that a sentence of detention during Her Majesty’s pleasure is mandatory: it is fixed by law and is imposed automatically in all cases where persons under the age of 18 are convicted of murder, the trial judge having no discretion. It is also the case that the 1991 Act as well as recent policy statements treat the sentence at issue in the present case in an identical manner to mandatory life sentences as regards proceedings for release on licence and recall (see paragraphs 25 and 29 above).
On the other hand, it is undisputed that, in its statutory origins, the expression "during Her Majesty’s pleasure" had a clearly preventive purpose and that - unlike sentences of life custody or life imprisonment - the word "life" is not mentioned in the description of the sentence.
52.   Nevertheless, important as these arguments may be for the understanding of the sentence of detention under section 53 in English law, the decisive issue in the present context is whether the nature and, above all, the purpose of that sentence are such as to require the lawfulness of the continued detention to be examined by a court satisfying the requirements of Article 5 para. 4 (art. 5-4).
53.   It is recalled that the applicant was sentenced to be detained during Her Majesty’s pleasure because of his young age at the time of the commission of the offence. In the case of young persons convicted of serious crimes, the corresponding sentence undoubtedly contains a punitive element and accordingly a tariff is set to reflect the requirements of retribution and deterrence. However an indeterminate term of detention for a convicted young person, which may be as long as that person’s life, can only be justified by considerations based on the need to protect the public.
These considerations, centred on an assessment of the young offender’s character and mental state and of his or her resulting dangerousness to society, must of necessity take into account any developments in the young offender’s personality and attitude as he or she grows older. A failure to have regard to the changes that inevitably occur with maturation would mean that young persons detained under section 53 would be treated as having forfeited their liberty for the rest of their lives, a situation which, as the applicant and the Delegate of the Commission pointed out, might give rise to questions under Article 3 (art. 3) of the Convention.
54.   Against this background the Court concludes that the applicant’s sentence, after the expiration of his tariff, is more comparable to a discretionary life sentence. This was, albeit in a different context, the view expressed by the Divisional Court in its judgment of 20 April 1993 (R. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex parte Prem Singh - see paragraph 24 above).
The decisive ground for the applicant’s continued detention was and continues to be his dangerousness to society, a characteristic susceptible to change with the passage of time. Accordingly, new issues of lawfulness may arise in the course of detention and the applicant is entitled under Article 5 para. 4 (art. 5-4) to take proceedings to have these issues decided by a court at reasonable intervals (see, mutatis mutandis, the above-mentioned Thynne, Wilson and Gunnell judgment, p. 30, para. 76).
B. Whether the available remedies satisfied therequirements of Article 5 para. 4 (art. 5-4)
55.   The Government accepted that if, contrary to their submissions, Article 5 para. 4 (art. 5-4) did confer additional rights to challenge the lawfulness of the applicant’s continued detention, there would have been a breach of that provision (art. 5-4) but only to the extent that the Parole Board had no general power to order the release of the applicant after the expiry of his tariff. In reply to the applicant’s submission that the importance and the nature of the issue, that is the detainee’s mental state, called for an oral hearing, including the possibility of calling and questioning witnesses, the Government recalled that Article 5 para. 4 (art. 5-4) does not confer an absolute right to an adversarial procedure and that to the extent that fairness did require an oral hearing, this could be secured by bringing judicial review proceedings.
56.   The Commission found that the Parole Board’s lack of decision-making power meant that it could not be regarded as a body satisfying the requirements of Article 5 para. 4 (art. 5-4). As to the need for an oral hearing, the Delegate of the Commission added that judicial review "is a very uncertain remedy given the fact that express provision is made for an oral hearing in the case of discretionary life prisoners, but not in the case of persons detained during Her Majesty’s pleasure".
57.   The Court recalls that Article 5 para. 4 (art. 5-4) does not guarantee a right to judicial control of such scope as to empower the "court" on all aspects of the case, including questions of expediency, to substitute its own discretion for that of the decision-making authority; the review should, nevertheless, be wide enough to bear on those conditions which, according to the Convention, are essential for the lawful detention of a person subject to the special type of deprivation of liberty ordered against the applicant (see, inter alia, the above-mentioned Weeks judgment, p. 29, para. 59, the E. v. Norway judgment of 29 August 1990, Series A no. 181-A, p. 21, para. 50, and the above-mentioned Thynne, Wilson and Gunnell judgment, p. 30, para. 79).
58.   As in Thynne, Wilson and Gunnell (p. 30, para. 80) and despite the new policy allowing persons detained under section 53 of the 1933 Act the opportunity to see the material before the Parole Board (see paragraph 24 above), the Court sees no reason to depart from its findings in the case of Weeks (cited above, pp. 29-33, paras. 60-69) that the Parole Board does not satisfy the requirements of Article 5 para. 4 (art. 5-4). Indeed, to the extent to which the Parole Board cannot order the release of a prisoner this is not contested by the Government. However, the lack of adversarial proceedings before the Parole Board also prevents it from being regarded as a court or court-like body for the purposes of Article 5 para. 4 (art. 5-4).
59.   The Court recalls in this context that, in matters of such crucial importance as the deprivation of liberty and where questions arise which involve, for example, an assessment of the applicant’s character or mental state, it has held that it may be essential to the fairness of the proceedings that the applicant be present at an oral hearing (see, mutatis mutandis, the Kremzow v. Austria judgment of 21 September 1993, Series A no. 268-B, p. 45, para. 67).
60.   The Court is of the view that, in a situation such as that of the applicant, where a substantial term of imprisonment may be at stake and where characteristics pertaining to his personality and level of maturity are of importance in deciding on his dangerousness, Article 5 para. 4 (art. 5-4) requires an oral hearing in the context of an adversarial procedure involving legal representation and the possibility of calling and questioning witnesses.
61.   It is not an answer to this requirement that the applicant might have been able to obtain an oral hearing by instituting proceedings for judicial review. In the first place, Article 5 para. 4 (art. 5-4) presupposes the existence of a procedure in conformity with its requirements without the necessity of instituting separate legal proceedings in order to bring it about. In the second place, like the Delegate of the Commission, the Court is not convinced that the applicant’s possibility of obtaining an oral hearing by way of proceedings for judicial review is sufficiently certain to be regarded as satisfying the requirements of Article 5 para. 4 (art. 5-4) of the Convention.
C. Recapitulation
62.   In conclusion, the Court finds that there has been a violation of Article 5 para. 4 (art. 5-4) of the Convention in that the applicant, after the expiry of his tariff, was unable to bring the case of his continued detention during Her Majesty’s pleasure before a court with the powers and procedural guarantees satisfying that provision (art. 5-4).