I.  THE COURT'S ASSESSMENT OF THE EVIDENCE AND ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FACTS
A.  Arguments of the parties
1.  The applicants
58.  The applicants mainly argued that Mehmet Şah İkincisoy had died as a result of torture at the hands of police officers at the Diyarbakır Rapid Intervention Force Headquarters.
2.  The Government
59.  The Government denied the applicants' version of the facts and maintained that Mehmet Şah İkincisoy had been killed in a clash on 23 November 1993.
B.  General principles
60.  The Court recalls that, in assessing evidence, it adopts the standard of proof “beyond reasonable doubt” (see Orhan v. Turkey, no. 25656/94, § 264, 18 June 2002). Such proof may follow from the coexistence of sufficiently strong, clear and concordant inferences or of similar unrebutted presumptions of fact. The Court is sensitive to the subsidiary nature of its role and must be cautious in taking on the role of a first-instance tribunal of fact, where this is not rendered unavoidable by the circumstances of a particular case (see, for example, McKerr v. the United Kingdom (dec.), no. 28883/95, 4 April 2000). Where domestic proceedings have taken place, it is not the Court's task to substitute its own assessment of the facts for that of the domestic authorities and, as a general rule, it is for those authorities to assess the evidence before them (see Klaas v. Germany, judgment of 22 September 1993, Series A no. 269, p. 17, § 29). Though the Court is not bound by the latter's findings, in normal circumstances it requires cogent elements to lead it to depart from the findings of fact they have reached (ibid., p. 18, § 30). In this context, the conduct of the parties when evidence is being obtained has to be taken into account (see Ireland v. the United Kingdom, judgment of 18 January 1978, Series A no. 25, p. 65, § 161).
C.  The Court's evaluation of evidence and establishment of the facts
61.  The Court observes in the first place that the documentary evidence and the witnesses' oral testimony are in the main consistent as regards the general account of the events. The respondent state accepted that on 22 November 1993 a police team composed of five police officers from the Anti-Terrorism Branch of the Diyarbakır Security Directorate conducted a search in the first applicant's apartment. Their aim was to find Mehmet Şah İkincisoy and to take him to the police headquarters for interrogation in connection with an ongoing investigation. When they were informed that Mehmet Şah was staying at his uncle's house, the police officers took the second applicant as a guide and left the first applicant's apartment. The Government further agreed that when the officers had arrived at Abdülkadir İkincisoy's apartment, one of the police officers stayed at the entrance of the building and two officers went inside the apartment together with the second applicant. They were informed that Mehmet Şah was there, together with his two friends. The two officers then started to interrogate them in a room and one of the men who was staying with Mehmet Şah shot and killed one of the police officers. These facts are also in conformity with the testimonies of Abdurrazak , Halil, Nasır and Garipşah İkincisoy before the Delegates. The Court has carefully examined these testimonies and compared them with the statements taken from the two police officers who had participated in the operation. Accordingly, it accepts the above account as the true facts of the case until the killing of the first police officer.
62.  The Court further observes that the parties have divergent accounts concerning the events that took place following the shooting in Abdülkadir İkincisoy's apartment. The İkincisoy family members, who were in Abdülkadir's apartment, stated that subsequent to the shooting of the police officer, the second officer grabbed Mehmet Şah and dragged him downstairs (see paragraphs 45 and 47). This fact is also confirmed by officers Hünelitürkoğlu and Akay, who maintained that officer Hünerlitürkoğlu used Mehmet Şah as a shield. However it is maintained that when the second officer was shot, Mehmet Şah had escaped (see in this respect paragraphs 49-50). The witnesses and the custody records submitted by the Government revealed that subsequent to the shooting, all family members who had been present in Abdülkadir's and Abdurrazak's  apartments had been taken into custody (see paragraphs 25, 43, 45, 47 and 48). Although the İkincisoy family members argued that they were first taken to the Çarşı Police Station and then to the Rapid Intervention Force (see paragraphs 43, 46 and 48), the officers denied this submission, insisting that the arrested persons had been directly taken to the Rapid Intervention Headquarters for interrogation (see paragraphs 52 and 54).
63.  The Court observes that in their testimonies Abdurrazak1, Halil, Nasır and Garipşah İkincisoy maintained that they had seen Mehmet Şah in the Çarşı Police Station and heard his voice at the Rapid Intervention Force. The Court notes that the testimony of the applicants and their witnesses essentially reiterated the content of their written statements. They submitted important details such as a description of his clothes and of the place where they had last seen him. On the other hand, the Government denied that Mehmet Şah had been detained by the police officers. They argued that he had escaped after the shooting of the second officer and died the day after in an armed clash. The Government witnesses further referred to the custody records which did not contain the name of Mehmet Şah, whereas it contained the names of all the rest of the İkincisoy family members who had been detained that night. The Court must therefore examine whether these custody records can be regarded as irrefutable evidence that Mehmet Şah had not been detained. It recalls both its own findings and those of the Commission as to the general inadequacy and unreliability of custody records (see İrfan Bilgin v. Turkey, no. 25659/94, § 130, ECHR 2001 VIII, Çakıcı v. Turkey [GC], no. 23657/94, § 105, ECHR 1999-IV, and Aydın v. Turkey, judgment of 25 September 1997, Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1997-VI, p. 1941, § 172). Concluding that such records cannot in general be relied upon to prove that a person was not taken into custody, the Court considers that the fact that Mehmet Şah İkincisoy's name was not in the custody record at the Diyarbakır Security Directorate does not itself prove that he was not in custody.
64.  On the other hand, the Court observes that the testimonies of Abdurrazak1, Halil, Nasır and Garipşah İkincisoy, who were detained at the Rapid Intervention Force, were balanced, detailed and consistent with each other. It therefore accepts the evidence of the four witnesses who stated that they had seen Mehmet Şah when they were themselves being held on the same premises.
65.  The Court accordingly concludes that Mehmet Şah was taken into custody on 22 November 1993 and that he was subsequently shot dead.
66.  On the basis of these findings, the Court will proceed to examine the applicants' complaints under the various Articles of the Convention.
II.  ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 2 OF THE CONVENTION
A.  General principles
67.  Article 2, which safeguards the right to life and sets out the circumstances when deprivation of life may be justified, ranks as one of the most fundamental provisions in the Convention, to which no derogation is permitted. Together with Article 3, it also enshrines one of the basic values of the democratic societies making up the Council of Europe. The circumstances in which deprivation of life may be justified must therefore be strictly construed. The object and purpose of the Convention as an instrument for the protection of individual human beings also requires that Article 2 be interpreted and applied so as to make its safeguards practical and effective (McCann and Others v. the United Kingdom, judgment of 27 September 1995, Series A no. 324, §§ 146-147).
68.  In the light of the importance of the protection afforded by Article 2, the Court must subject deprivations of life to the most careful scrutiny, taking into consideration not only the actions of State agents but also all the surrounding circumstances. Detained persons are in a vulnerable position and the authorities are under a duty to protect them. Consequently, where an individual is taken into police custody in good health and is found to be injured on release, it is incumbent on the State to provide a plausible explanation of how those injuries were caused (see, amongst other authorities, Selmouni v. France [GC], no. 25803/94, § 87, ECHR 1999-V). The obligation on the authorities to account for the treatment of a detained individual is particularly stringent where that individual dies or disappears thereafter (Orhan, cited above, § 326).
69.  Where the events in issue lie wholly, or in large part, within the exclusive knowledge of the authorities, as in the case of persons within their control in detention, strong presumptions of fact will arise in respect of injuries and death occurring during that detention. Indeed, the burden of proof may be regarded as resting on the authorities to provide a satisfactory and convincing explanation (see Salman v. Turkey [GC], no. 21986/93, § 100, ECHR 2000-VII, Çakıcı, cited above, § 85, Ertak v. Turkey, no. 20764/92, § 32, ECHR 2000-V, Timurtaş v. Turkey, no. 23531/94, § 82, ECHR 2000-VI, and Orhan, cited above, § 327).
B.  Alleged failure to protect the right to life
70.  The Court has accepted above (paragraph 65) that Mehmet Şah İkincisoy was taken into custody on 22 November 1993 and died on 23 November 1993 while he was under the control of the security authorities of the respondent state.
71.  The Court draws very strong inferences from the lack of any documentary evidence indicating that Mehmet Şah was taken into custody. It has held in its earlier judgments that an unacknowledged detention would be life-threatening in the general context of the situation in south-east Turkey in 1993 (see Taş v. Turkey, no. 24396/94, § 66, 14 November 2000, Çiçek v. Turkey, no. 25704/94, § 146, 27 February 2001, and Timurtaş, cited above, § 85).
72.  Furthermore, as explained below (see paragraph 79), the autopsy examination, which had critical importance in determining the circumstances surrounding the death of Mehmet Şah, was defective in fundamental aspects. In this respect, the Court is further struck by the refusal of the domestic authorities to deliver Mehmet Şah's body to his family, who intended to request a detailed autopsy.
73.  The Court therefore concludes that it cannot be established beyond reasonable doubt that Mehmet Şah died during a clash. The authorities have thus failed to establish the real circumstances surrounding the death of Mehmet Şah, who was under their custody.
74.  In view of the above, the Court concludes that Mehmet Şah was deprived of his life in circumstances engaging the responsibility of the respondent State. There is nothing to suggest that this was necessary for any of the reasons set out in the second paragraph of Article 2 of the Convention.
75.  There has therefore been a violation of Article 2 of the Convention in that respect.
C.  Alleged inadequacy of the investigation
76.  The Court reiterates that the obligation to protect the right to life under Article 2 of the Convention, read in conjunction with the State's general duty under Article 1 of the Convention to “secure to everyone within [its] jurisdiction the rights and freedoms defined in [the] Convention”, also requires by implication that there should be some form of effective official investigation when individuals have been killed as a result of the use of force (see, mutatis mutandis, McCann and Others, cited above, § 161, and Kaya v. Turkey, judgment of 19 February 1998, Reports 1998-I, § 105). The essential purpose of such investigation is to secure the effective implementation of the domestic laws which protect the right to life and, in those cases involving state agents or bodies, to ensure their accountability for deaths occurring under their responsibility. What form of investigation will achieve those purposes may vary in different circumstances. However, whatever mode is employed, the authorities must act of their own motion, once the matter has come to their attention. They cannot leave it to the initiative of the next of kin either to lodge a formal complaint or to take responsibility for the conduct of any investigatory procedures (see, for example, mutatis mutandis, İlhan v. Turkey [GC], no. 22277/93, § 63, ECHR 2000-VII).
77.  For an investigation into an alleged unlawful killing by State agents to be effective, it may generally be regarded as necessary for the persons responsible for and carrying out the investigation to be independent from those implicated in the events (Güleç v. Turkey, judgment of 27 July 1998, Reports 1998-IV, §§ 81-82, and Oğur v. Turkey [GC], no. 21594/93, §§ 91-92, ECHR 1999-III). The investigation must also be effective in the sense that it is capable of leading to a determination of whether the force used in such cases was or was not justified in the circumstances (Kaya, cited above, § 87) and to the identification and punishment of those responsible (Oğur, cited above, § 88). This is not an obligation of result, but of means. The authorities must have taken the reasonable steps available to them to secure the evidence concerning the incident, including, inter alia, eye-witness testimony (see, concerning witnesses, for example, Tanrıkulu v. Turkey [GC], no. 23763/94, § 109, ECHR 1999 IV). Any deficiency in the investigation which undermines its ability to establish the cause of death or the person responsible will risk falling foul of this standard (Orhan, cited above, § 355).
78.  Turning to the particular circumstances of the case, the Court observes that the investigation conducted by the public prosecutor was defective in a number of fundamental aspects. The Court is struck by the heavy reliance placed by the public prosecutor, who investigated the death of Mehmet Şah, on the conclusion of the incident report dated 23 November 1993. According to this incident report an intense clash had taken place which lasted for twenty minutes. Furthermore, according to the ballistic report 251 bullet cases had been recovered from the place of the incident. However it does not appear from the file whether the public prosecutor compared the facts as stated in the incident report with the photographs of the hut taken after the incident. The public prosecutor appears to have excluded the possibility that the circumstances surrounding the death of Mehmet Şah could have been different than those stated in the incident report. In this respect, it should also be recalled that the applicants had brought to the public prosecutor's attention the possibility that Mehmet Şah could have been killed under torture. Without taking statements from the family members of the deceased who were also arrested that day or the police officers who were involved in the clash, the public prosecutor concluded that Mehmet Şah had died during a clash.
79.  It further appears from the autopsy report that Mehmet Şah was shot from behind by a bullet which entered from the upper part of his shoulder and exited from below his chest. It is striking that the public prosecutor did not seek any further explanation as to how a person involved in an intense clash could be shot from behind and most probably by a person who was standing above him. The Court also observes in this context that the autopsy report lacked valuable and important information which would clarify the circumstance surrounding the death of Mehmet Şah. The absence of any indication about the approximate positions of the person who fired and the victim and the distance between them at the moment of the shot as well as the size of the bullet entry and exit wounds constitute important deficiencies.
80.  In the light of the foregoing, the Court concludes that the investigation cannot be considered to have been effective as required by Article 2 of the Convention. It accordingly holds that there has been a violation of Article 2 on this account also.
III.  ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 3 OF THE CONVENTION IN RESPECT OF MEHMET ŞAH İKİNCİSOY
81.  The applicants complained that Mehmet Şah İkincisoy was tortured before his death, invoking Article 3 of the Convention, which provides:
“No one shall be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.”
82.  The applicants submitted that Mehmet Şah had been tortured in custody. They maintained in this respect that several members of the İkincisoy family had heard his screams at the rapid Intervention Force Headquarters.
83.  The applicants further alleged a breach of Article 3 of the Convention as a result of the anguish they have suffered due to their inability to learn the true circumstances surrounding the death of Mehmet Şah.
84.  The Government submitted that the applicants' allegation was untrue and unsubstantiated.
85.  The Court refers to its finding above where it has established that Mehmet Şah had died while he was under the control of the domestic authorities (see paragraph 65). However contrary to the applicants' allegations of torture, it observes from the photographs and the autopsy report that there were no marks or injuries on the body of Mehmet Şah which were consistent with the allegations of torture. It notes that the applicants' allegations of torture are solely based on the assumption that some of the persons who were detained in the Rapid Intervention Force Headquarters had heard the cries of Mehmet Şah. On the basis of the material in its possession and noting that the allegation of ill-treatment is not corroborated by any other evidence, the Court notes that the applicants' complaints are based on hypothesis and speculation rather than on reliable evidence.
86.  In these circumstances, and having regard to its conclusion under Article 2 of the Convention, the Court does not find it appropriate to draw inferences proposed by the applicants as to whether torture or ill-treatment occurred (see, in this respect, Tanlı, cited above, § 159).
87.  As regards the applicants' submission concerning the effects of the events on themselves, the Court has no doubt of the profound suffering caused by the death of Mehmet Şah. It finds no basis however for finding a violation of Article 3 in this context.
88.  The Court finds that it has not been established that there has been a violation of Article 3 of the Convention. It consequently finds no violation of that provision.
IV.  ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 5 OF THE CONVENTION
89.  The applicants alleged that their police custody breached Article 5 §§ 1 (c), 3, 4 and 5 of the Convention, which provide:
“1.  Everyone has the right to liberty and security of person. No one shall be deprived of his liberty save in the following cases and in accordance with a procedure prescribed by law:
...
(c)  the lawful arrest or detention of a person effected for the purpose of bringing him before the competent legal authority on reasonable suspicion of having committed an offence or when it is reasonably considered necessary to prevent his committing an offence or fleeing after having done so;
3.  Everyone arrested or detained in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 1 (c) of this Article shall be brought promptly before a judge or other officer authorised by law to exercise judicial power and shall be entitled to trial within a reasonable time or to release pending trial. Release may be conditioned by guarantees to appear for trial.
4.  Everyone who is deprived of his liberty by arrest or detention shall be entitled to take proceedings by which the lawfulness of his detention shall be decided speedily by a court and his release ordered if the detention is not lawful.
5.  Everyone who has been the victim of arrest or detention in contravention of the provisions of this Article shall have an enforceable right to compensation.”
A.  Concerning the police custody of Hüseyin, Makbule, Nefise and Garipşah İkincisoy
90.  The applicants contended that the first applicant's four children, Hüseyin, Makbule, Nefise and Garipşah İkincisoy, had not been brought promptly before a judge. In this respect they invoked Article 5 of the Convention.
91.  In so far as the applicants complain about the police custody of Hüseyin, Makbule, Nefise and Garipşah İkincisoy, the Court recalls in the first place that the term victim in Article 34 of the Convention denotes the person directly affected by the act or the omission which is at issue (see Eckle v. Germany, judgment of 15 July 1982, Series A no. 51, p.30, § 66).
92.  The Court observes that the two applicants are not personally concerned by the detention of these four persons. Furthermore, they cannot substantiate the reason why these persons have themselves refrained from lodging applications with the Court.
93.  Accordingly, the Court concludes that the applicants cannot claim to be victims within the meaning of Article 34 of the Convention regarding the police custody of Hüseyin, Makbule, Nefise and Garipşah İkincisoy.
B.  Article 5 § 1 (c) of the Convention
94.  The applicants contended that their arrests were arbitrary and unlawful, in breach of Article 5 § 1 of the Convention.
95.  The Court reiterates that the “reasonableness” of the suspicion on which an arrest must be based forms an essential part of the safeguard against arbitrary arrest and detention which is laid down in Article 5 § 1 (c). Having a reasonable suspicion presupposes the existence of facts or information which would satisfy an objective observer that the person concerned may have committed the offence (Labita v. Italy [GC], no. 26775/95, § 155, ECHR 2000-IV). What may be regarded as reasonable will however depend on all the circumstances (see Fox, Campbell and Hartley v. the United Kingdom, judgment of 30 August 1990, Series A no. 182, p. 16, § 32).
96.  The Court recalls in particular that the reasonable suspicion referred to in Article 5 § 1 (c) of the Convention does not mean that the suspected person's guilt must at that stage be established. It is precisely the purpose of the investigation that the reality and nature of the offences laid against the accused should definitely be proved (see Murray v. the United Kingdom, judgment of 28 October 1994, Series A no. 300 A, p. 27, § 55). Sub-paragraph (c) of Article 5 § 1 does not even presuppose that the police should have obtained sufficient evidence to bring charges, either at the point of arrest or while the applicant was in custody (see Erdagöz v. Turkey, judgment of 22 October 1997, Reports 1997-VI, p. 2314, § 51).
97.  In the instant case the Court observes that the applicants were taken into custody, on suspicion of aiding and abetting the PKK and for being involved in the events which resulted in the killing of a police officer and the wounding of another. The Court is therefore satisfied that there were reasonable and sufficient grounds to believe that the applicants had been involved in an offence. It has examined these elements and has not disclosed any manifestly unreasonable or arbitrary conclusions drawn by the competent authorities from them. It thus sees no reason to doubt that the elements of which the authorities disposed were sufficient to believe, at that time, that the applicants had been involved in an offence.
98.  In the light of the foregoing, the Court concludes that there has been no violation of Article 5 § 1 of the Convention.
C.  Article 5 § 3 of the Convention
99.  Under Article 5 § 3 of the Convention, the applicants complained that they were not brought promptly before a judge.
100.  The Court recalls that Article 5, in general, aims to protect the individual against arbitrary interference by the State with his right to liberty. Article 5 § 3 intends to avoid the arbitrariness and to secure the rule of law by requiring a judicial control of the interference by the executive (see Sakık and Others v. Turkey, judgment of 26 November 1997, Reports 1997-VII, p. 2623, § 44).
101.  To be in accordance with Article 5 § 3, judicial control must be prompt. Promptness has to be assessed in each case according to its special features (see De Jong, Baljet and Van den Brink v. the Netherlands, judgment of 22 May 1984, Series A no. 77, pp. 24-25, §§ 51-52). However, the scope of flexibility in interpreting and applying the notion of promptness is very limited (Brogan and Others v. the United Kingdom, judgment of 29 November 1988, Series A no. 145 B, pp. 33-34, § 62).
102.  The Court has accepted on several occasions that the investigation of terrorist offences undoubtedly presents the authorities with special problems (see the following judgments: Brogan and Others, cited above, p. 33, § 61, Murray, cited above, p. 27, § 58, Aksoy v. Turkey, judgment of 18 December 1996, Reports 1996-VI, p. 2282, § 78, and Demir and Others v. Turkey, judgment of 23 September 1998, Reports 1998-VI, p. 2653, § 41). This does not mean, however, that the investigating authorities have carte blanche under Article 5 to arrest suspects for questioning, free from effective control by the domestic courts and, ultimately, by the Convention supervisory institutions, whenever they choose to assert that terrorism is involved (see Murray, cited above, p. 27, § 58).
103.  Concerning the police custody of the first applicant, the Court recalls that the fact that a detained person is not charged or brought before a court does not in itself amount to a violation of the first part of Article 5 § 3. No violation of Article 5 § 3 can arise if the arrested person is released “promptly” before any judicial control of his detention would have been feasible (see De Jong, Baljet and Van den Brink, cited above, p. 25, § 52, and Brogan and Others, cited above, pp. 31-2, § 58). The Court finds that the release of the first applicant, who was held in police custody for no more than three days, may be regarded as “prompt” for these purposes. Accordingly, there has been no violation of Article 5 § 3 of the Convention in his case.
104.  As to the length of the police custody of the second applicant, the Court observes that he was held in police custody for eleven days from 22 November to 3 December 1993. It recalls that in the Brogan and Others case it held that detention in police custody which had lasted four days and six hours without judicial control fell outside the strict constraints as to the time laid down by Article 5 § 3 of the Convention, even though its purpose was to protect the community as a whole against terrorism (see Brogan and Others, cited above, p. 33, § 62).
105.  Even though the investigation of terrorist offences, as supposed in this case, presents the authorities with special problems, the Court cannot accept that it was necessary to detain the second applicant for eleven days without judicial intervention.
106.  Therefore the Court concludes that there has been a breach of Article 5 § 3 in respect of the second applicant.
D.  Article 5 § 4 of the Convention
107.  The applicants complained that they had not been able to take proceedings to have the lawfulness of their detention decided by a judge.
108.  Concerning the first applicant, the Court recalls its finding under Article 5 § 3 (see paragraph 103) that he was released before any judicial control of his detention would have been feasible and concludes that there has accordingly been no violation of Article 5 § 4 in respect of the first applicant.
109.  Concerning the second applicant, the Court notes that a judge did not intervene until the end of his police custody, that is to say eleven days after his arrest. Having regard to the conclusion it reached with regard to Article 5 § 3 (see paragraph 106), the Court considers that such a lengthy period sits ill with the notion of “speedily” (see Sakık and Others, cited above, § 53). In conclusion, there has been a breach of Article 5 § 4 of the convention in respect of the second applicant.
E.  Article 5 § 5 of the Convention
110.  Lastly, the applicants alleged that, in breach of Article 5 § 5, under Turkish law it was not possible for them to claim compensation for a violation of Article 5 in the domestic courts.
111.  In respect of the first applicant, the Court reiterates that this provision guarantees an enforceable right to compensation only to those who have been the victims of arrest or detention contrary to Article 5 of the Convention (see Benham v. the United Kingdom, judgment of 10 June 1996, Reports 1996-III, p. 755, § 50). In the absence of any such finding in the present case, the Court is of the opinion that there is no violation of Article 5 § 5 in respect of the first applicant.
112.  As regards the second applicant who was held in custody for eleven days, the Court notes that the domestic legislation which was in force at the time of the events permitted police custody up to fifteen days without being brought before a judge. Accordingly, a compensation request for police custody which lasted for eleven days would not succeed before the domestic courts. The Court therefore concludes that there has been a violation of Article 5 § 5 of the Convention in respect of the second applicant.
V.  ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 6 OF THE CONVENTION
113.  The applicants further complained that there was no effective investigation into Mehmet Şah's death and that they were denied access to a court, in violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, which in relevant part, provides as follows:
“In the determination of his civil rights and obligations ..., everyone is entitled to a fair ... hearing ... by [a] tribunal ...”
114.  The Court observes that the essence of the applicants' complaint under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention concerns the domestic authorities failure to mount an effective criminal investigation into Mehmet Şah's death. In the Court's view, it is therefore more appropriate to examine the applicants' Article 6 complaint in relation to the more general obligation on Contracting States under Article 13 of the Convention to provide an effective remedy in respect of violations of the Convention (see, amongst other authorities, Kaya, cited above, p. 329, § 105 and Aksoy, cited above, p. 286, § 93).
115.  It accordingly does not find it necessary to determine whether there has been a violation of Article 6 § 1.
VI.  ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLES 8, 9 AND 14 OF THE CONVENTION
116.  The applicants complained that the search which was conducted in their house on 22 November 1993 constituted a breach of Article 8 of the Convention. They further alleged a breach of Article 9 of the Convention referring to their inability to open the grave of Mehmet Şah İkincisoy. Finally, they invoked Article 14 of the Convention alleging that they had been subjected to discrimination because of their Kurdish origin.
117.  The Government did not address these issues beyond denying the factual basis of the complaints.
118.  The Court has examined the applicants' allegations in the light of the evidence submitted to it, and considers them unsubstantiated. There has therefore been no violation of these provisions.
VIII.  ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 13 OF THE CONVENTION
119.  The applicants asserted that they had been denied access to an effective domestic remedy and alleged a breach of Article 13 of the Convention, which provides:
“Everyone whose rights and freedoms as set forth in [the] Convention are violated shall have an effective remedy before a national authority notwithstanding that the violation has been committed by persons acting in an official capacity.”
120.  The applicants complained that despite the fact that they had lodged petitions with the public prosecutor to ensure that the allegations of torture and the death of Mehmet Şah were properly investigated, no effective investigation had been conducted into the circumstances of the death.
121.  The Government alleged that there had been no shortcomings in the investigation concerning the killing of Mehmet Şah.
122.  As the Court has held many times, Article 13 guarantees the availability at the national level of a remedy to enforce the substance of the Convention rights and freedoms in whatever form they might happen to be secured in the domestic legal order. The effect of Article 13 is thus to require the provision of a domestic remedy to deal with the substance of the relevant Convention complaint and to grant appropriate relief, although Contracting States are afforded some discretion as to the manner in which they conform to their Convention obligations under this provision. The scope of the obligation under Article 13 varies depending on the nature of the applicant's complaint under the Convention. Nevertheless, the remedy required by Article 13 must be “effective” in practice as well as in law, in particular in the sense that its exercise must not be unjustifiably hindered by the acts or the omissions of the authorities of the respondent State (Aksoy, cited above, § 95, Aydın, cited above, § 103, and Kaya, cited above, § 89).
123.  The nature of the rights safeguarded under Articles 2 and 3 of the Convention has implications for Article 13. Where there is an arguable claim that an individual has been tortured or subjected to serious ill-treatment, or deprived of his or her life, by agents of the State, Article 13 requires, in addition to the payment of compensation where appropriate, a thorough and effective investigation capable of leading to the identification and punishment of those responsible for the treatment in question or the deprivation of life, including effective access for the complainant to the investigation procedure (Salman, cited above, § 121).
124.  On the basis of the evidence adduced in the present case, the Court has found that the Government are responsible under Article 2 of the Convention for the death of Mehmet Şah while he was under custody. The applicants' complaints in this regard are therefore “arguable” for the purposes of Article 13 (see Boyle and Rice v. the United Kingdom, judgment of 27 April 1988, Series A no. 131, p. 23, § 52, and Kaya, cited above, § 107).
125.  The authorities thus had an obligation to carry out an effective investigation into the circumstances of the death of Mehmet Şah İkincisoy. For the reasons set out above (see paragraphs 78-80), no effective criminal investigation can be considered to have been conducted in accordance with Article 13, the requirements of which may be broader than the obligation to investigate imposed by Articles 2 and 3 (Kaya, cited above, pp. 330-331, § 107, Salman, cited above, § 123, and Nuray Şen v. Turkey (no. 2), no. 25354/94, § 193, 30 March 2004).
126.  The Court therefore concludes that there has been a violation of Article 13 of the Convention.
X.  ALLEGED VIOLATION OF FORMER ARTICLE 25 OF THE CONVENTION
127.  The applicants complained that there had been a serious interference with the exercise of their right of individual petition, in breach of Article 25 of the Convention (now replaced by Article 34), which provides as follows:
“The Court may receive applications from any person, non-governmental organisation or group of individuals claiming to be the victim of a violation by one of the High Contracting Parties of the rights set forth in the Convention or the Protocols thereto. The High Contracting Parties undertake not to hinder in any way the effective exercise of this right.”
128.  The applicants submitted that on 6 June 1995 the first applicant was taken before the public prosecutor for interrogation concerning his application with the Commission. He was questioned about his individual application and was asked whether the signatures on the letter of authority and his statement to the Human Rights Association belonged to him. The first applicant had to sign his statement under pressure and stated that he would retract his application.
129.  The Government denied these assertions. They insisted that the authorities had never brought pressure on the applicants to withdraw their application to the Convention organs.
130.  The Court recalls that it is of the utmost importance for the effective operation of the system of the individual petition instituted by former Article 25 (now replaced by Article 34) that applicants should be able to communicate freely with the Convention organs without being subjected to any form of pressure from the authorities to withdraw or modify their complaints (see Şarli v. Turkey, no. 24490/94, § 84, 22 May 2001). In this context, “pressure” includes not only direct coercion and flagrant acts of intimidation but also other improper indirect acts or contacts designed to dissuade or discourage applicants from pursuing a convention remedy.
131.  Turning to the facts of the instant case, the Court observes that it is accepted by the parties that the applicant was indeed interviewed by the public prosecutor on 6 June 1995 as alleged upon the instructions of the Ministry of Justice International Law and Foreign Relations Directorate concerning his application with the Commission (see paragraphs 39 and 56).
132.  The Court therefore finds that the applicant was subjected to indirect and improper pressure to make statements in respect of his application to the Commission which interfered with the free exercise of his right of individual petition guaranteed under Article 25.
133.  The Court accordingly holds that the respondent State has failed to comply with its obligations under former Article 25 of the Convention.
XI.  APPLICATION OF ARTICLE 41 OF THE CONVENTION
134.  Article 41 of the Convention provides:
“If the Court finds that there has been a violation of the Convention or the Protocols thereto, and if the internal law of the High Contracting Party concerned allows only partial reparation to be made, the Court shall, if necessary, afford just satisfaction to the injured party.”
A.  Pecuniary Damage
135.  The applicants submitted that Mehmet Şah İkincisoy was twenty- two years old and had worked as a livestock trader before his death. Although he did not have a stable income, he had an average annual income of 3,000,000,000 Turkish liras (TRL). Taking into account his age and average life expectancy in Turkey, the calculation according to Ogden actuarial method resulted in the capitalised sum of 68,010.40 pounds sterling (GBP).
136.  The Government claimed that the allegations were unsubstantiated and that there was no basis for awarding compensation. In any event, they submitted that the sum claimed was excessive.
137.  The Court notes that Mehmet Şah İkincisoy was unmarried and had no children. It is not claimed that the applicants were in any way dependent on him. In the present case, the claims for pecuniary damage relate to alleged loss of earnings accruing subsequent to the death of the first applicant's son and the second applicant's brother. The Court notes that the applicants have not proved that they suffered the pecuniary loss they alleged. The Court does not find it appropriate in the circumstances of this case to make any award to the applicants under this head.
B.  Non-pecuniary damage
1.  Concerning the death of Mehmet Şah İkincisoy
138.  The applicants claimed, having regard to the seriousness and number of violations, GBP 40,000 in respect of Mehmet Şah İkincisoy and GBP 2,500 each in respect of the suffering they had to face due to their inability to learn the exact circumstances surrounding the death of Mehmet Şah.
139.  The Government requested the refusal of the applicants' claims.
140.  The Court considers that an award should be made in respect of non-pecuniary damage bearing in mind the seriousness of the violations which it has found in respect of Articles 2 and 13 of the Convention concerning the death of Mehmet Şah.
141.  Accordingly, having regard to the sums which it has awarded in comparable cases and deciding on an equitable basis, the Court awards 25,000 euros (EUR) for non-pecuniary damage, such sum to be held by the applicants for the heirs of Mehmet Şah İkincisoy.
142.  The Court accepts that the applicants have themselves suffered non-pecuniary damage which cannot be compensated solely by the findings of violations. Making its assessment on an equitable basis, the Court awards EUR 3,500 to each of the applicants.
2.  Concerning the police custody of the second applicant
143. The second applicant claimed the sum of GBP 10,000 for non-pecuniary damage in respect of his detention for a period of eleven days before being brought before the public prosecutor.
144.  The Government did not make any comments on this point.
145.  The Court recalls its finding above and considers that the second applicant should be awarded compensation for non-pecuniary damage since he must have suffered distress, fear and anxiety considering that he was kept in police custody for eleven days without any judicial intervention. Deciding on an equitable basis, as required by Article 41, the Court awards him the sum of EUR 4,000.
3.  Summary
146.  Accordingly, the following amounts are awarded to the applicants by way of non-pecuniary compensation, all sums to be converted into Turkish liras at the rate applicable at the date of payment:
(a)  EUR 25,000 to both applicants to be held by them for the heirs of Mehmet Şah İkincisoy;
(b)  EUR 3,500 to each of the applicants;
(c)  EUR 4,000 to the second applicant.
C.  Punitive or exemplary damages
147.  In relation to the interference with the exercise of the applicants' right of individual petition, in breach of Article 25 of the Convention (now replaced by Article 34), the applicants requested the Court to rule for an exemplary punitive damage.
148.  The Government denied these assertions.
149.  The Court notes that in a number of recent Grand Chamber cases it has rejected requests by applicants for exemplary and punitive damages (see Orhan, cited above, § 448, Selçuk and Asker v. Turkey, judgment of 24 April 1998, Reports 1998-II, p. 918, § 119, and Lustig-Prean and Beckett v. the United Kingdom, nos. 31417/98 and 32377/96, §§ 22-23, 27 September 1999).
150.  The Court therefore dismisses the applicants' claim under this head.
D.  Costs and expenses
151.  Finally, submitting a schedule of costs, the applicants claimed a total sum of GBP 14,446.58 for costs and expenses. These claims comprised:
(a)	GBP 4,355 for fees of United Kingdom-based lawyers;
(b)	GBP 105.60 for administrative costs incurred by the United Kingdom-based lawyers;
(c)	GBP 1,380 for administrative costs incurred by the Kurdish Human Rights Project (“KHRP”);
(d)	GBP 1,485 for translations carried out by the KHRP;
(e)	GBP 6,750 for fees of Turkish lawyers
(f)	GBP 370.98 for costs incurred by Turkish lawyers
152.  The Government considered these claims exorbitant and unsubstantiated. They disputed that any sum should be awarded in respect of the role of the KHRP, which organisation could be categorised neither as an applicant nor as a representative.
153.  The Court reiterates that only legal costs and expenses necessarily and actually incurred can be reimbursed under Article 41 of the Convention. Furthermore, the amounts claimed must be reasonable as to quantum. It notes in this connection that the present case involved complex issues of fact and law requiring detailed examination, including the taking of evidence from witnesses in Ankara. However, the Court is not satisfied that in the instant case all the costs and expenses were necessarily and actually incurred.
154.  Making its own estimate based on the information available, the Court awards the applicants in respect of costs and expenses EUR 15,000 exclusive of any value-added tax that may be chargeable, such sum to be converted into pounds sterling and paid into the applicants' representatives' bank account in the United Kingdom as set out in their just satisfaction claim.
E.  Default interest
155.  The Court considers it appropriate that the default interest should be based on the marginal lending rate of the European Central Bank, to which should be added three percentage points.

FOR THESE REASONS, THE COURT UNANIMOUSLY
1.  Holds that there has been a violation of Article 2 of the Convention in relation to Mehmet Şah İkincisoy's death;

2.  Holds that there has been a violation of Article 2 of the Convention on account of the failure of the authorities of the respondent State to conduct an effective investigation into the circumstances of the death of Mehmet Şah İkincisoy;

3.  Holds that there has been no violation of Article 3 of the Convention;

4.  Holds that it is unnecessary to determine whether there has been a breach of Article 6 of the Convention;

5.  Holds that the applicants cannot claim to be victims within the meaning of Article 34 of the Convention regarding Hüseyin, Makbule, Nefise and Garipşah İkincisoy's complaints under Article 5 of the Convention;

6.  Holds that there has been no violation of Article 5 §§ 1, 3, 4 and 5 of the Convention in respect of the first applicant;

7.  Holds that there has been no violation of Article 5 § 1 of the Convention in respect of the second applicant;

8.  Holds that there has been a violation of Article 5 § 3 of the Convention in respect of the second applicant;

9.  Holds that there has been a violation of Article 5 § 4 of the Convention in respect of the second applicant;

10.  Holds that there has been a violation of Article 5 § 5 of the Convention in respect of the second applicant;

11.  Holds that there has been no violation of Articles 8, 9 and 14 of the Convention;

12.  Holds that there has been a violation of Article 13 of the Convention;

13.  Holds that the respondent State has failed to comply with its obligations under former Article 25 § 1 of the Convention;



14.  Holds
(a)  that the respondent State is to pay the applicants, within three months from the date on which the judgment becomes final according to Article 44 § 2 of the Convention, the following amounts free of any tax that may be chargeable, to be converted into Turkish liras at the rate applicable at the date of payment and to be paid into the bank account in Turkey indicated by the applicants:
(i)  EUR 25,000 (twenty-five thousand euros) in respect of Mehmet Şah İkincisoy, which sum is to be held by the applicants for the heirs of Mehmet Şah İkincisoy;
(ii)  EUR 3,500 (three thousand five hundred euros) to each of the applicants in respect of non-pecuniary damage;
(iii)  EUR 4,000 (four thousand euros) in respect of non-pecuniary damage to the second applicant concerning his police custody;
(b)  that from the expiry of the above-mentioned three months until settlement simple interest shall be payable on the above amounts at a rate equal to the marginal lending rate of the European Central Bank during the default period plus three percentage points;

15.  Holds
(a)  that the respondent State is to pay the applicants' representatives, within three months from the date on which the judgment becomes final according to Article 44 § 2 of the Convention, EUR 15,000 (fifteen thousand euros) in respect of costs and expenses, exclusive of any value added tax that may be chargeable to be converted into pounds sterling at the rate applicable at the date of settlement and paid into the bank account in the United Kingdom indicated by the applicants;
(b)  that from the expiry of the above-mentioned three months until settlement simple interest shall be payable on the above amounts at a rate equal to the marginal lending rate of the European Central Bank during the default period plus three percentage points;

16.  Dismisses the remainder of the applicants' claim for just satisfaction.
Done in English, and notified in writing on 27 July 2004, pursuant to Rule 77 §§ 2 and 3 of the Rules of Court.
	Michael O'BOYLE	Josep CASADEVALL
	Registrar	President
