

                      AS TO THE ADMISSIBILITY OF

                      Application No. 17488/90
                      by William GOODWIN
                      against the United Kingdom

      The European Commission of Human Rights sitting in private on
7 September 1993, the following members being present:

           MM.   C.A. NØRGAARD, President
                 S. TRECHSEL
                 A. WEITZEL
                 F. ERMACORA
                 G. JÖRUNDSSON
                 A.S. GÖZÜBÜYÜK
                 H.G. SCHERMERS
                 H. DANELIUS
           Mrs.  G.H. THUNE
           Sir   Basil HALL
           MM.   C.L. ROZAKIS
                 L. LOUCAIDES
                 J.-C. GEUS
                 B. MARXER
                 G.B. REFFI
                 I. CABRAL BARRETO
                 B. CONFORTI

           Mr.   M. de SALVIA, Deputy Secretary to the Commission

      Having regard to Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection
of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms;

      Having regard to the application introduced on 27 September 1990
by William GOODWIN against the United Kingdom and registered on 26
November 1990 under file No. 17488/90;

      Having regard to:

-     reports provided for in Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of the
      Commission;

-     the observations submitted by the respondent Government on
      18 August 1992 and the observations in reply submitted by the
      applicant on 3 December 1992;


-     the parties' submissions at the oral hearing before the
      Commission on 7 September 1993;

      Having deliberated;

      Decides as follows:
THE FACTS

      The applicant is a British citizen born in 1966 and resident in
London.  He is represented before the Commission by Mr. Geoffrey
Bindman, a solicitor practising in London.

      The facts of the present case, as submitted by the parties and
which may be deduced from documents lodged with the application, may
be summarised as follows.

      The applicant is a journalist.  In August 1989, he began working
for the publication "The Engineer".

      On 2 November 1989, the applicant was telephoned by a source,
which gave him information about a company, X Ltd.. The information was
unsolicited, was not in exchange for payment and the applicant alleges
that he had no reason to believe that the information was derived from
a stolen or confidential document.  The information was given on an
unattributable basis.

      On 6 and 7 November 1989, the applicant telephoned X Ltd. to
check the facts and seek their comments on the information which he had
been given.  He prepared a draft article for publication in "The
Engineer" to the effect that the company was in the process of raising
a £5 million loan and had financial problems as a result of an expected
loss of £2.1 million for 1989.

      X Ltd. alleged that the information was derived from a draft of
its confidential Corporate Plan which had gone missing on 1 November
1989.  On 7 November 1989 X Ltd. applied for and obtained an ex parte
interim injunction to restrain the publishers of "The Engineer"
publishing any information derived from the Corporate Plan.

      On 8 November 1989, a writ was issued against the publishers
claiming an injunction and a notice of motion was served seeking, inter
alia, an order that the publishers disclose the identity of their
source.

      On 10 November 1989, the publishers submitted their evidence for
the motion, including an affidavit by the applicant in which he
referred to notes of his conversation with his source.

      On 14 November 1989, at the hearing of the motion, X Ltd.
obtained an order that the publishers should disclose the applicant's
notes, which identified his source, pursuant to Section 10 of the
Contempt of Court Act 1981 ("the 1981 Act").

      On 15 November 1989, X Ltd. were given leave to join the
applicant and his employer to the proceedings.  The judge gave all
three defendants until 3,00 p.m. on 16 November 1989 to deliver up the
notes.  He also granted interim injunctions against the two additional
defendants, the applicant and his employer.

      On 16 November 1989, X Ltd. informed all national newspapers and
relevant journals of the injunction.

      On 17 November 1989, the High Court made an order that the
applicant represented all persons who received the plan or information
derived from it without the authority of X Ltd. and that such persons
should, inter alia, deliver up any copies of the plan in their
possession.  The motion was then adjourned for the applicant to bring
this order to the attention of his source.  The applicant declined to
do so however.

      On 22 November 1989, the applicant was again ordered to disclose
his notes: this time by the deadline of 3.00 pm on 23 November 1989.
Mr. Justice Hoffman stated that it was necessary "in the interests of
justice" for the purposes of Section 10 of the 1981 Act for the
source's identity to be disclosed to enable X Ltd. to bring proceedings
against the source to recover the document, to obtain an injunction
preventing further publication or to seek damages for the expenses to
which they had been put.  Although the applicant was an innocent
recipient of the information, the judge concluded that the source who
had telephoned the applicant had probably seen the stolen document and
indeed was probably the thief. He was satisfied that there was strong
prima facie evidence that X Ltd. had suffered a serious wrong by the
theft of its confidential file and that it would suffer serious
commercial damage if the information was disclosed.  He dismissed the
argument of the applicant that it was in the public interest for the
information to be disclosed, stating that there was nothing to show
that previously published information about the company was false and
that there was no legal or moral ground for making the information
available to customers, suppliers or competitors.

      The applicant applied the same day to the Court of Appeal for a
stay.  The stay was refused but the Court of Appeal substituted an
order that the applicant either disclose his notes to X Ltd. or deliver
them to the Court in a sealed envelope with accompanying affidavit. The
applicant did not comply with either order by the deadline.

      On 23 November 1989, the applicant lodged an appeal against the
order of 22 November on the grounds that the disclosure order was not
necessary in the interests of justice, and that the public interest in
publication outweighed the interest in preserving confidentiality, and
that since the applicant had not facilitated the breach of confidence,
a disclosure order against him was not valid.  The same day, the
applicant was served with a notice of motion seeking his committal for
contempt.

      On 24 November 1989, in a hearing in the High Court it was
conceded by the applicant's counsel that he was in contempt.  The
motion was however adjourned pending the applicant's appeal.

      On 29 November 1989, the Court of Appeal began to hear the
applicant's appeal.  While it heard counsel for the publisher and the
applicant's employer, it refused to hear applicant's counsel since the
applicant was in continuing contempt.

      On 12 December 1989, the Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal
against the disclosure order but granted leave to appeal to the House
of Lords.  Lord Justice McGowan noted that the applicant must have been
"amazingly naive" if it did not occur to him that the source was at the
very least guilty of a breach of confidence.

      The appeal was heard before the House of Lords between 5 and
8 March 1990.

      On 4 April 1990, the House of Lords dismissed the appeal.  It
applied the principle expounded by Lord Reid in a previous leading case
and applied in previous cases:

      "<The authorities> seem to me to point to a very reasonable
      principle that if through no fault of his own a person gets
      mixed up in the tortious acts of others so as to facilitate
      their wrong-doing he may incur no personal liability but he
      comes under a duty to assist the person who has been
      wronged by giving him full information and disclosing the
      identity of the wrongdoers." (Norwich Pharmacal Co. v.
      Customs and Excise Commissioners [1974] A.C. 133).

      Lord Bridge, in one of the five separate speeches given in the
applicant's case, stated:

      "Whenever disclosure is sought, as here, of a document
      which will disclose the identity of a source within the
      ambit of Section 10, the statutory restriction operates
      unless the party seeking disclosure can satisfy the court
      that 'disclosure is necessary' in the interests of one of
      the four matters of public concern that are listed in the
      Section. I think it is indisputable that where a judge asks
      himself the question: 'Can I be satisfied that disclosure
      of the source of this information is necessary to serve
      this interest?' he has to engage in a balancing exercise.
      He starts with the assumptions, first, that the protection
      of sources is itself a matter of high public importance,
      secondly, that nothing less than necessity will suffice to
      override it, thirdly, that the necessity can only arise out
      of concern for another matter of high public importance,
      being one of the four interests listed in the Section ..."

      He referred to a number of other cases in relation to how the
balancing exercise should be conducted (e.g. Secretary of State for
Defence v. Guardian Newspapers Ltd [1985] A.C. 339) and continued:

      "It would be foolish to attempt to give comprehensive
      guidance as to how the balancing exercise should be carried
      out. But it may not be out of place to indicate the kind of
      factors which will require consideration.  In estimating
      the importance to be given to the case in favour of
      disclosure there will be a wide spectrum within which the
      particular case must be located.  If the party seeking
      disclosure shows, for example, that his very livelihood
      depends upon it, this will put the case near one end of the
      spectrum.  If he shows no more than that what he seeks to
      protect is a minor interest in property, this will put the
      case at or near the other end.  On the other side the
      importance of protecting a source from disclosure in
      pursuance of the policy underlying the statute will also
      vary within a wide spectrum.  One important factor will be
      the nature of the information obtained from the source.
      The greater the legitimate public interest in the
      information which the source has given to the publisher or
      intended publisher, the greater will be the importance of
      protecting the source.  But another and perhaps more
      significant factor which will very much affect the
      importance of protecting the source will be the manner in
      which the information was itself obtained by the source. If
      it appears to the court that the information was obtained
      legitimately this will enhance the importance of protecting
      the source.  Conversely, if it appears that the information
      was obtained illegally, this will diminish the importance
      of protecting the source unless, of course, this factor is
      counterbalanced by a clear public interest in publication
      of the information, as in the classic case where the source
      has acted for the purpose of exposing iniquity.  I draw
      attention to these considerations by way of illustration
      only and I emphasise once again that they are in no way
      intended to be read as a code ...

      In the circumstances of the instant case, I have no doubt
      that Hoffmann J. and the Court of Appeal were right in
      finding that the necessity for disclosure of Mr. Goodwin's
      notes in the interests of justice was established.  The
      importance to the plaintiffs of obtaining disclosure lies
      in the threat of severe damage to their business, and
      consequentially to the livelihood of their employees, which
      would arise from disclosure of the information contained in
      their corporate plan while their refinancing negotiations
      are still continuing.  This threat, accurately described by
      Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. [1990] 2 W.L.R. 421, 439,
      as 'ticking away beneath them like a time bomb' can only be
      defused if they can identify the source either as himself
      the thief of the stolen copy of the plan or as a means to
      lead to the identification of the thief and thus put
      themselves in a position to institute proceedings for the
      recovery of the missing document.  The importance of
      protecting the source on the other hand is much diminished
      by the source's complicity, at the very least, in a gross
      breach of confidentiality which is not counterbalanced by
      any legitimate interest which publication of the
      information was calculated to serve.  Disclosure in the
      interests of justice is, on this view of the balance,
      clearly of preponderating importance so as to override the
      policy underlying the statutory protection of sources and
      the test of necessity for disclosure is satisfied ..."

      Lord Templeman concurring also commented that the applicant ought
to have "recognised that (the information) was both confidential and
damaging".

      On 10 April 1990, the High Court fined the applicant £5 000 for
contempt.

RELEVANT DOMESTIC LAW AND PRACTICE

      Section 10 of the Contempt of Court Act 1981 provides:

      "No court may require a person to disclose, nor is a person
      guilty of contempt of court for refusing to disclose the
      source of information contained in the publication for
      which he is responsible, unless it be established to the
      satisfaction of the court that disclosure is necessary in
      the interests of justice or national security or for
      prevention of disorder or crime."

COMPLAINTS

      The applicant invokes Article 10 para. 1 of the Convention. He
submits that the disclosure order made by the High Court and confirmed
on appeal constituted an interference with his freedom of expression
by a public authority. According to the applicant, the order has a
chilling effect on the likelihood of sources communicating information
to journalists such as himself, and his right to impart information to
the public has also been impaired thereby.

      The applicant contends that the disclosure order was not
prescribed by law, since it was based on the general law under which
an order can be made for the disclosure of the identity of a wrong-doer
and the provisions of Section 10 of the 1981 Act.  The requirements of
foreseeability were not satisfied in these circumstances. Further,
while conceding that the order pursued the legitimate aim of protecting
the rights of others, namely, X Ltd., the applicant considers that
there was no pressing social need for the restraint, since X Ltd. was
already protected by the injunction against leakage of confidential
information.  The restraint was also not proportionate to the aim,
since it has cast a disproportionate chilling effect on the free flow
of information generally.


PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE COMMISSION

      The application was introduced on 27 September 1990 and
registered on 26 November 1990.

      On 7 April 1992, the Commission decided to communicate the
application to the respondent Government and to ask for written
observations on the admissibility and merits of the application.

      The Government's observations were submitted on 18 August 1992
after one extension in the time-limit and the applicant's observations
in reply were submitted on 3 December 1992 after two extensions in the
time-limit.

      On  11 December 1992,  the Commission decided to grant legal aid
to the applicant.

      On 2 April 1993, the Commission decided to invite the parties to
make further observations on the admissibility and merits of the
application at an oral hearing.

      At the hearing, which took place on 7 September 1993, the
Government were represented as follows:

Mr. Iain Christie           Agent
Mr. Michael Baker QC        Counsel
Mr. Oliver Parker           Adviser, Lord Chancellor's Department

      The applicant was represented as follows:

Mr. Geoffrey Robertson QC   Counsel
Mr. Geoffrey Bindman        Solicitor
Mr. Robert Sack       )     Lawyers from Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher, New
Ms. Anne Hilker       )     York

      The applicant was also present.


THE LAW

      The applicant complains that the disclosure order imposed by the
High Court constituted an interference with his right to freedom of
expression contrary to Article 10 (Art. 10) of the Convention.

      Article 10 (Art. 10) of the Convention provides:

      "1.  Everyone has the right to freedom of expression. This
      right shall include freedom to hold opinions and to receive
      and impart information and ideas without interference by
      public authorities and regardless of frontiers...

      2.   The exercise of these freedoms, since it carries with
      it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such
      formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are
      prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic
      society, in the interests of national security, territorial
      integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder
      or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the
      protection of the reputation or rights of others, for
      preventing the disclosure of information received in
      confidence, or for maintaining the authority and
      impartiality of the judiciary."

      The applicant submits that the disclosure order made by the High
Court and confirmed on appeal constituted an interference with his
freedom of expression guaranteed by Article 10 (Art. 10) of the
Convention. According to the applicant, the order has a chilling effect
on the likelihood of sources communicating information to journalists
such as himself, and his right to impart information to the public has
also been impaired thereby.

      The applicant contends that the disclosure order breached his
duty of confidentiality to his source and was not "prescribed by law",
since  the law permitting such orders is not formulated with sufficient
precision to enable the individual to foresee with reasonable certainty
when it will be applied.  In particular, he argues that the criterion
of the "interests of justice" is insufficiently certain and renders
impossible the task of a journalist in assessing whether or not he can
give a source an undertaking not to reveal his identity. Further, the
applicant considers that there was no pressing social need for the
restraint, since X Ltd. was already protected by the injunction against
publication of confidential information in the press and had made no
use of alternative means of identifying the source.  The restraint was
also not proportionate to the aim, since it included the threat to the
applicant of up to two years' imprisonment and has cast a
disproportionate chilling effect on the free flow of information to the
public generally.

      The Government accept that the action of the courts amounted to
a restriction on the applicant's freedom of expression within the scope
of the first paragraph of Article 10 (Art. 10). The Government submit
however that the interference was "prescribed by law" within the
meaning of the second paragraph, and refer to domestic case-law as
indicating that  the relevant principle is well-established, accessible
and foreseeable in its application and consequences.

      The Government further submit that the interference was
"necessary in a democratic society" for the purpose of protecting the
rights of others and for preventing the disclosure of information
received in confidence. They submit that Section 10 of the 1981 Act
gives recognition to the high public importance of protecting the free
flow of information to the press and provides a heavy presumption
against ordering disclosure. The interest of protecting journalistic
sources cannot however outweigh all others and, they argue, in the
assessment of whether "the interests of justice" required disclosure
in this particular case, the domestic courts gave full and reasoned
consideration to all the competing interests. The Government contend
that having regard to the margin of appreciation, accorded to
Contracting States, there is no ground on which the Commission in its
supervisory jurisdiction can substitute its own opinion for that of the
courts.

      The Commission considers that the applicant's complaints under
Article 10 (Art. 10) of the Convention raise complex issues of fact and
law, the determination of which should depend on a full examination of
the merits. These complaints cannot therefore be regarded as manifestly
ill-founded within the meaning of Article 27 para. 2 (Art. 27-2) of the
Convention. No other ground for declaring the case inadmissible has
been established.


      For these reasons, the Commission, by a majority,


      DECLARES THE APPLICATION ADMISSIBLE without prejudging the
      merits.

Deputy Secretary to the Commission          President of the Commission


     (M. DE SALVIA)                               (C.A. NØRGAARD)

